
	TO ROLF TRAUZETTEL Teacker, mentor, friend lcontentsl






	) CHAPTER SEVEN 99 Indifference and Negative Ethics CHAPTER EIGHT I I
I	Permanence and Eternity

	CHAPTER NINE I 2 I	Death and the Death Penalty

	CHAPTER TEN 3	"Without the Impulses of Man": A Daoist Critiquee of
Humanism APPENDIX I A Note on the Textual History of the Daodejing	147

	APPENDIX 2 A Note on English Translations of the Daodejing	149
NOTES	153	I ND EX	161 PREFACE



	The Philosophy of the Daodejing




	In a collection of essays on teaching the Daodejing1 (or the Laozi, as I
will call it here, if only for the sake of brevity), for which I was asked to
write an introduction, several authors claim that this ancient Daoist
"classic" is religious in nature and not, or at least not primarily,
philosophical. I respectfully disagree with these opinions. I think that the
text was initially (that is, in the fourth and third centuries B.C.E) a guide
on what may be called "political philosophy" or, more specifically, a
treatise on how to preserve or constitute order in society and, by extension,
in the cosmos. Given today's historical evidence, it was not until the Han
dynasty (206 B.C.E.-220 C.E.) that the Laozi became a cornerstone of
religious activities and that religious Daoism "took off" as a social
phenomenon. Even if the Laozi is regarded as a philosophical text, readers
sometimes complain that it is obscure and vague -- and thus not very good
philoso- phy. The text is often difficult to decipher and its terseness, as
well as its "mystical" character, may make it seem impenetrable, particularly
to those who expect clarity from a philosophical text. But that the Laozi is
different in style and nature from contemporary philosophical writings should
not prejudice readers. It stems from a time and culture that certainly did




	CHAPTER



	"Without the Impulses of Man" A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM







	Toward the end of chapter 5 in the Zkuangri there is the fol- lowing
dialogue between Zhuangzi and his friend Hui Shi: Said Hui Shi to Zhuangzi:
"Can a man really be without the impulses of man?" "He can." "If a man is
without the impulses of man, how can we call him a man?" "The Dao gives him
the guise, heaven gives him the shape, how can we refuse to call him a man?"
"But since we do call him a man, how can he be without the impulses of man?"
"Judging 'That's it, that's not' is what I mean by 'the impulses of man.'
What I mean by being without the impulses is that the man does not in-wardly
wound his person by likes and dislikes, that he constantly goes by the
spontaneous and does not add anything to the process of life." 1 The Daoist
sages are at the fringes of humanity. Outwardly they look like humans and
live in their company, but they are more companions of "heaven" than
companions of men. By nature, man is human-therefore 134	A DAOIST CRITIQUE
OF HUMANISM

	the sages have a human shape. But by nature humans are also natural, and
the sages are able to develop this larger nature within themselves to such a
degree that their "humanity" does not affect their being simply natural. What
I translated as "the impulses" of man in the above passage is qing in the
original, a term that is otherwise often translated as "feeling" or
"emotion."2 The "emotional" quality of human beings is certainly associated
here with qing -- and I chose the term "impulses" to include such
connotations. The specific explanation of qing given by the Zhuangzi,
however, is slightly different from a purely "psychological" meaning. The
Zhuangzi says twice that what is meant by qing is the human judgmental
attitude, the tendency to either approve of disapprove, to say "it is so" or
"it is not so" (shi and fei in Chinese). This particular attitude is
apparently, at least in this short dialogue, what constitutes the particular
"human" aspect that is overcome by the sage-and by the sage alone (in
"solitude"). The attitudes of approving or disapproving, of liking and
disliking, are those that make humans special-both generically and
individually. Generically, the human species is probably the only one that
cognitively distinguishes between what is right and what is wrong, between
what is true and what is false. These distinctions indeed distinguish man
from the rest of nature. But, maybe even more importantly, it is also by
these attitudes that individuals distinguish themselves from other
individuals. We are different from each other by having different likes and
dislikes, by having different opinions and adhering to different truths. It
is through our ability to judge that we develop individuality and that we can
differentiate ourselves from others. This is maybe, at least from the
perspective of the Zhuangzi, the most important philosophical aspect of
having likes and dislikes: by them we distinguish ourselves as humans. The
Daoist sages acknowledge these human characteristics and do not aim at
abolishing them. However, they remain untouched by them. Alone, in
"solitude," is the sage able to refrain from distinguishing him- or her- self
by these distinctive judgments. Only in this way can the sage remain truly
and universally affirmative. Only by not siding with any specific affirmation
that would necessarily include a specific negation can the sage A DAOIST
CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM	135

	affirm everything. The Daoist sage is thus not an "overman," but rather
an "underman" who remains below the threshold of human individua-tion-as
opposed to all other human individuals. The sage "takes on the place which
the mass of the people detest" (to use the words of chapter 8 of the Laozi)
and dispenses with any ambition to be distinct. It is, in typi-cally
paradoxical Daoist fashion, by this total renunciation of any human
distinction that the sages distinguish themselves from all humans. The Daoist
sage is, in other words, the only human who is free from human vanity, free
from the impulse to determine what is right and what is wrong-and this can be
understood in any sense: aesthetically, morally, emotionally,
"scientifically." The sage is the only human who has no de-sire to prefer,
for instance, the beautiful over the ugly, to label this as good and that as
evil, to find dying emotionally more disturbing than living, to deem one
opinion as correct and another as incorrect. This does not mean that Daoist
sages would deny these human distinctions, but they do not "inwardly wound
their persons" with them. The sage is thus not hu-mane-and therefore all the
more natural-and the above passage from the Zhuangzi can well be understood
as an illustration of the following lines from chapter 5 of the Laozi:

	Heaven and earth are not humane. They regard the ten thousand things as
straw dogs. The sage is not humane.

	He regards all the people as straw dogs. 3

	Instead of being "humane," the Daoist sage rather takes on the attitude
of heaven and earth and treats human beings like "straw dogs" (cku gou).
Straw dogs, as ancient and modem commentators point out in unison,4 were
highly revered elements in sacrificial rituals, but after the ritual they
lost all their meaning and were simply discarded. A passage in the Zhuangzi
explains: "Before the straw dogs are laid out for the sacrifice, they are
packed in bamboo boxes wrapped inpatterned brocades, and the medium and the
priest fast and do austerities before escorting them. But once the sacrifice
is over, nothing remains for them but to have their heads and


	A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM

	represent a definite version ofthe text. The text evolved, so to speak,
"self- so." This does not mean that there were no actual people who wrote the

	A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM

	renewal of the seasons and the renewed life of plants and animals, human
procreation would be impossible. 139 text down, but these people, as
individuals, cannot be identi-fied as authors. The inability to identify an
author, in the strict sense of this term, results in the inability to
identify a particular authorita-tive form ofthe text. The Laozi "morphed"
itself continuously, and the most advanced translations reflect exactly this.
The translation by Roger T. Ames and David Hall,7 for instance, comes along
with a Chinese text that never existed -- it is a collation of different
versions, including the newly discovered ancient manuscripts as well as the
"classical" commentaries. From a traditional "humanist" philological
perspective, Ames and Hall can thus he accused of a sacrilege -- they
violated the principle of identifying an "original"-but in the case of the
Laozi, I would argue in their defense. All attempts to identify an original
reflect a "humanist" prejudice.



	Chapters 3, 4, and ; ofthe present volume have explored how the Laozi
presents a non-humanist picture ofa realm that appears to "modern man"
intrinsically human. Society, in the Laozi, is not primarily human but
embedded and included incosmic processes. The agrarian society of ancient
China did not so much depend onhuman deeds as itdepended on such phenomena as
the weather. There was not much that men could do when there was a drought
oran earthquake. Human life had to follow the rhythm of "heaven and earth"
--the rhythm of Yin and Yang--rather than impose itself on nature. In the
larger cosmic functioning, the realm of men was only existent within the
realms of heaven and earth, and from this perspective an isolated humanist
concept even of human society would be one-sided or "abstract." Heaven and
earth cannot be bracketed when it comes to human life, and society has to be
understood in terms of nature rather than the other way around. The
interdependence between cosmic and human processes is particu-larly
conspicuous in the Laozi with respect to an issue that is often pre-sented as
exclusively human in our times. Sexuality, from the perspective of the Laozi,
is cosmic rather than human, and procreation is a larger issue within which
human fertility is only a moment. Without the continuous Given these
circumstances, the ruling of men, or human politics, cannot be undertaken
without the consideration of cosmic processes. Human "culture" cannot be
isolated from "nature"-- there is no "humanist" dichotomy between nature and
culture to begin with. Order within the state is a moment within the larger
cosmic order, and the principles oforder that apply in one realm are the same
that apply in another. The sage-ruler in the Lao{! is less preoccupied with
human issues -- unlike the ruler in models envisioned in early Western
modernity, like that ofthe Leviathan who has to rule out of specifically
human concerns and because of specifically human interests--than with
mediating between man and nature, operating as a link between society and the
cosmos. The sage-ruler is not so much a man among men as the pivotof the
volatile and delicate balance between heaven, man, and earth. In this book,
chapters 6, 7, 8, and 9 deal with psychological and cognitive aspects of
human existence. In these areas, the Laozi advocates meth-ods ofminimizing or
decreasing activity that come close to a dehuman-ization ofthe humane. The
Daoist sage is depicted as a human being that lacks specifically human
characteristics, such as desires, intentions, emo-tions, and judgments. As a
link between the human realm and heaven and earth, the sage becomes as
indifferent to human categories as these two realms naturally are. Heaven and
earth do not "care"--and neither does the Daoist sage inthe Laozi. But this
absence ofcare is not "carelessness," it is quite the opposite. Itis the
condition for a smooth and thus friction-less integration ofthe human world
into the larger cosmos. The emotional and cognitive inactivity ofthe sages is
the very condition not only for an impartial rule of the state but, more
importantly, for their ability to not interfere in what goes on "self-so"
(ziran). Only by emptying themselves f their selves can the sage-rulers he
without any personal or individual concerns that would necessarily result in
a "conflict of interests" and thus infringe upon the harmony in the world.
The nonhuman (non-)qualities of the sage integrate humans seamlessly into the
world. This results in a world of pure immanence. The A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF
HUMANISM

	sage practically manifests the immanence of humankind. There is noth-ing
human left which is "transcendent" with respect to tbe world. Man is not
created in the image of a transcendent God with an inbuilt capacity to
cognitively-through "ideas" -transcend the "material." There is no program to
subdue nature, nor is there any kind of superiority attached to humans. The
hum an realm functions as "organically" or, if one prefers this metaphor,
"machinically" as the rest of the cosmos. By holding their human "impulses"
in check, the sages hold the human impulses of all humankind in check. The
sages do not function as saviors of mankind, taking all human "sins" upon
themselves, but (at least in the political philosophy of the Laozi give up
their human characteristics for the benefit of all others. This is remarkably
different from the Christian model. Through Jesus Christ, God became human,
and He took on distinctively human features in order to save and ennoble all
humans. This

	Christian model of humanization seems to be the exact opposite of the
Daoist strategy. The Laozi aims at serving humankind through an ideal being
who reduces all human "impulses."

	The non-humanist philosophy of the Laozi may seem quite unattractive to
readers accustomed to modern Western humanism. Christianity is, in
practically all its variations, a thoroughly humanist religion, and while the
Enlightenment tended to dispense with the religious "superstructure,"
religious values were often secularized so that the humanist core was not
only preserved but even amplified or condensed. Concepts such as "human
rights," or "human dignity," are clearly humanistic, but also notions such as
"freedom" and "liberty," "democracy" and "justice," and even more concrete
ideals such as "education" and "health," are deeply humanist and enjoy great
public prestige in current Western societies. These terms, along with many
related ones, constitute the dominant semantics in con- temporary society,
and there is not much in the Laozi that would connect to them. On the
contrary, the non-humanist philosophy of the Laozi is often diametrically
opposed to these semantics. Is the Laozi therefore a philosophical "scandal"
in our times? Should it be discarded like a straw dog because the ritual in
which it served is no longer practiced? I don't A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF 
HUMANISM

	think so. While the Laozi can certainly not be taken "literally" and
while its non-humanist teachings cannot be immediately adopted in our times,
it can still function as an important contribution to the attempts at
overcom-ing some outdated humanist self-descriptions that are still
prevalent. While humanist semantics still dominates public discourse and
opinion in Western societies, it has, even here, lost a lot of its
philosophical credibility. A philosophical revolt against the humanist
vocabulary dates back to at least Friedrich Nietzsche, whose famous or
notorious "overman" is not so much a superhuman or "superman," but a novel
concept of the human that goes beyond narrow humanist categories. Nietzsche's
non-humanism has been taken up by some of the most influential contemporary
thinkers, particularly in so-called Continental philosophy. Michel Foucault's
book The Order of Things begins with a fictional, but nonetheless quite
realis-tic, description of a Chinese encyclopedia which represents a
decisively non-Western and non-humanist way of categorizing reality, and it
ends with the conclusion that "man is neither the oldest nor the most
constant problem that has been posed for human knowledge." The modern concept
of man is a European invention of the sixteenth century. If our society
changes again, Foucault states, "then one can certainly wager that man would
be erased, like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea. 8 Man has
become, at least since the Enlightenment, a "fundamental ar-rangement" ofour
knowledge, of our way of making sense of the world. However, as Foucault has
shown, this arrangement is not "natural," but historically contingent. It is
not necessary to describe the world in human terms, and there is no guarantee
at all that human terms are the most ad-equate for such a description. Other
postmodern authors, such as Gilles Deleuze, have further expanded Foucault's
criticism and presented new and often irritating philosophical concepts-such
as the "rhizome" which are clearly non- humanist but, rather, "organic" or
"machinic." It seems that while the philosophy of the Laozi is strongly at
odds with modern Western humanism, it is sometimes quite akin to current
develop-ments in post- humanist thought. This is, ifone takes Foucault's
words se-riously, not astonishing. Ifthe "thick" humanism ofthe modern
Western world is a historical phenomenon, then it cannot be a surprise that
other

	142 A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM 143
traditions do not share it-and thus are, at least with respect to what they
are not, comparable to postmodern developments. I would claim that the
coincidences between Daoism and postmodern philosophies are the coin-cidences
between a pre-humanist and a post-humanist philosophy. That there are such
parallels is not so surprising-if simply because neither of them is humanist.
And because the humanist semantics is still so perva-sive, these parallels
may stick out quite conspicuously. In other words, the pre-humanist Laozi and
post-humanist authors like Foucault and Deleuze may be perceived as equally
"scandalous." And they may both contribute to erasing that face in the
sand-which will not be to the delight of those who are still playing on that
beach.

	One may trace back the "contemporary" relevance of the non- humanist
Laozi along the lines of the above division of issues: textual, social, and
cognitive-psychological. In the first chapter of this book I compared the
textual characteristics of the Laozi to present-day hypertext. Rather than
the traditional "human-ist" linear development of a text by which a single
author addresses an audience, the Laozi represents an open textual structure.
Such open struc-tures become increasingly the norm in our society. While
(hopefully, with respect to the present instance) books are still read, other
textual forms are on the rise. On the Internet, traditional human forms of
communication are no longer practiced. Conversations are made by using
multiple pseud-onyms, and the codes of communication become so extremely
specialized that a high degree of familiarity with a "technical" language is
necessary for participation. No individual human authorship can be identified
in these discourses. A plurality of heterogeneous discourses emerges, and the
discourses seem to function systemically by generating their own rules. Even
traditional media have become more and more standardized. Soap operas are
written collectively, and the individual writer is replace- able-and
continuously replaced. So-called "reality TV" is by no means "real" in the
traditional sense but, to use Baudrillard's term, a simulated reality that
does not reflect a human reality outside the media. Even when one watches a
news channel, one is not confronted with an "individual" communicative
product, but with a variety of information "performed" on several parallel
layers: spoken commentary, different written texts si- multaneously
displayed, visual information, and so on. The "human" ele- ment in the types
of communication which take up such a large part of contemporary society is
hardly discernible. The areas that arguably produce the largest volume of
text in contem- porary society are the mass media and the Internet. Their
textual produc-tion can hardly be properly analyzed with traditional humanist
concepts. Most of today's texts are no longer written like Dickens's novels
or Kant's philosophical works once were. Traditionally, such textual products
were studied within the "humanities," but this very concept becomes
increas-ingly obsolete with respect to the understanding of texts. The
humanities were called humanities in the spirit of the Enlightenment, which
conceived of texts as products of and for subjectivity. But these premises
are no longer generally valid. The mass media of the twenty-first century are
hardly instances of "subjectivity," and new academic disciplines or
methodologies have to be invented to study these phenomena. Given these
drastic changes, it may be assumed that the traditional cat- egories of
literary analysis will not necessarily dominate the reception of such texts
as the Laozi forever. It may well turn out that, on the basis of a post-
humanist hermeneutics, the pre-humanist Laozi will appear in a new light.
And, perhaps, the new study of ancient pre-humanist texts may even help to
develop a future post-humanist hermeneutics. Probably even more shocking to
contemporary readers than its textual characteristics are the social and
political aspects of the Laozi. The Laozi does not look at society as a
community of individuals, and it does not suggest that humans look for
creative ways to organize their community politically so that it will be just
and beneficial. In short, the Laozi does not view society as being
constituted by human agency. Even, and particularly, the most powerful human
being in society, the sage-ruler, does not act. While the lack of human
agency certainly goes against the dominating description of current society,
I am not so sure if it is actually so much at odds with social reality.
Although humans in a "free" society certainly tend to conceive of themselves
as having some control over society, one 144	A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF
HUMANISM	A DAOIST CRITIQUE OF HUMANISM

	may, as in the Daoist state, doubt if the politically powerful actually
shape psychological setup. The "ego" is more a construct or product of  con-
society through their agency. Even presidents and governments cannot steer
events. While they can make decisions, it is always unclear what these
decisions will actually bring about. A government may introduce a new law,
but there is no guarantee that this will result in what was in-tended.
Another government may go to war, but it may well be that this decision fails
to bring about the desired results. Human agency is taken for granted, but it
is by no means clear that what happens in society is actu-ally a direct
effect of the actions of political decision makers. Maybe it is not entirely
outlandish to presume, as the Laozi does, that the function of political
power and leadership is, in a certain sense, more symbolic than practical.
Leaders manifest the unity of a society and give the impression that an order
is established and that rules are in place. But it is not clear, despite the
dominating semantics, if political leaders are actually able to literally
lead society. There may be a similar lack of human agency in the functioning
of the economy. The mechanisms of the so-called market are often not re-ally
traceable to the specific economic decisions of individuals. There is no
specific person or group that the rise or fall of a currency, of infla-tion
or deflation, can be attributed to. Even if, looking back, one is used to
ascribing such developments to certain people or decisions--let's say to the
tax-cut of a government--these claims are highly dubious. If it were really
in the power of politicians or other human beings to steer the economy as
economic agents, why would recessions occur? The tendency to ascribe economic
developments to human decisions after the fact may rather prove the human
will to such ascriptions than actual human economic agency. The potential for
human agency in the psychological and cogni-tive realm may also be
questioned-both from an ancient Daoist pre-humanism as well as from a current
post-humanist perspective. It was once more Friedrich Nietzsche (and later,
in his footsteps, Sigmund Freud) who identified the amount of human vanity
that is attached to such notions as a "free will." The free will that the
modern Western "enlighten-ment" valued so highly may be merely a minor
component of our actual sciousness than its actual "master." There are
uncontrollable drives and instincts, and there is aninaccessible unconscious
in relation towhich our "ego" seems to be rather powerless. As modern
experimental psychology has shown,


	there are many actions that, though we ascribe them to our willful
agency, we in fact perform automatically-and only by doing so can we perform
them well.9 We learn to drive a car by learning not to continuously think
about how to drive. We learn to reduce conscious deci-sions to a minimum so
that the traffic can flow. The orderly flow of traffic depends on the
minimization of individual "egos" involved in driving. The Laozi envisions a
similar automatic flow in society by decreasing the ego-focus of humans. I am
not convinced that a pre- or post-humanist philosophical outlook is has more
rightly attractive than a humanist one. Freud's "relativization" of the ego
has rightly been called the third insult to human vanity (after Copernicus
who showed that we are not at the center of the cosmos and Darwin who showed
that we were not present at the beginning of creation), and to have one's
vanity insulted often makes one feel uncomfortable. The humanist vision of
the world is perhaps more likable, more sympathetic, and more for flattering
the latter than the pre- and post-human alternatives. But one may still opt
for the latter for a very human reason: the non-humanist view seems to be a
more sincere and modest self-description, a self-description which not only
takes into account what humans can or should be able to do, but also what
they can't and therefore maybe shouldn't pretend to do. That at least, and at
last, saves humans a lot of trouble.
