Hey, so I had a couple of some technical difficulties with the videos that some of the videos  I recorded in my office.  So you guys get to see me now with a new background, welcome to my home.  I wanted to take a little bit longer the intro for the readings for this particular unit  because they're actually quite different than what you've had so far.  Up until now everything that you've read was written by someone in China, either Confucius  or Dronkso.  They're what we call primary sources.  What you're about to read is very different.  It's written by a contemporary philosopher and academic working within the academy whose  job is to help us understand the philosophy, right?  So he's not, this isn't something written by Dronkso or Lao Tzu or any other ancient  Chinese philosopher.  He was written by a contemporary questioner helping us to understand what he thinks, Dronkso  and Lao Tzu meant, okay?  So keep that in mind as you read.  It's a really different style of reading.  I hope you enjoy it.  I find it really useful and really actually quite insightful.  The primary point that he's going to be making is that Dronkso is and Lao Tzu.  He's talking primarily about Lao Tzu but we can include Dronkso in this, that the early  Dallas were anti-humanists and what that means is that or at least were non-humanists.  And again what that means is that they did not see humanity as the center of everything.  And this is a really different approach than most philosophies and religious traditions  around the world which tend to see humans either as sort of the pinnacle of creation  or at a very least as sort of the central element around which everything else resolves, revolves, okay?  And Mooner's argument really is that that's not the way the Dallas see things,  that they see humans as sort of just another part of the workings of the universe,  of the workings of the world, the natural world in particular.  And this is I think a really interesting and fairly insightful take on what these early  Dallas philosophers were arguing. And it's also one that pushes back strongly against a lot  of the tendencies and contemporary Western philosophy. So you don't have to agree with this stance  and in fact one of the things I want you to do in the discussion prompt is to really decide whether  you agree or disagree with Mooner's argument. But it is, nonetheless, it shows an interesting way  in which these ancient Chinese philosophies can actually push back and perhaps change or revise  some of what contemporary philosophers and a lot of contemporary people in general think and  see about the world. So I wanted to just sort of clue you in to the shift in perspective that we're  not yet talking about, we're no longer talking sort of primary sources written by ancient Chinese  philosophers, but that we're really now looking at a contemporary philosophical perspective on  those ancient ideas. And also to prompt you to really to think about this and it's perfectly fine  to disagree, it's perfectly fine to agree. What I want you to really do is come up with your own  opinions. How strong is Mooner's argument? Do you find it persuasive? Do you think that he's  missing something? Is there something in Johnson that you think that he gets wrong? So think about  that as you read and I will touch base with you again next week for Module 3. I hope you enjoy this  and I hope you have a good time writing the paper that will conclude the first week of this class.  All right, take care, see you soon.