In this very first lecture, we are going to go over some of thepreliminary concepts of networking. We will be talking about definitions,networking complexity, the growth of the internet, and some of thenetworking standards and metrics.Networking involves a complex set of concepts and technologies. And It'snot limited to just connecting devices; Due to the diverse nature ofnetworking, professionals in the field need specialized skills andexpertise. Individuals working in networking should be familiar withvarious domains such as hardware configurations, algorithm design,application development, network administration, security protocols,encryption techniques, and wireless communication.The use of "etc." emphasizes that the list provided is not exhaustive.Networking encompasses even more areas, technologies, and concepts beyondthose explicitly mentioned. And The field of networking is dynamic andcontinually evolving. Ongoing research efforts are crucial for improvingthe quality, speed, and reliability of networks. Researchers focus ondeveloping new protocols, enhancing security measures, optimizingalgorithms, and addressing emerging challenges in the ever-changinglandscape of networking. Why is networking complex? Networks often consist of a multitude of devices, ranging fromtraditional computers and servers to smartphones, IoT devices, and more.Each device may run different operating systems and applications,requiring compatibility and interoperability considerations.  And The field of networking indeed comes with a plethora of acronyms,technical terms, and evolving vocabulary. And as technology evolves, newconcepts and technologies emerge, each often accompanied by its own setof terms and acronyms. Keeping up with these changes can be challenging. And finally, wireless and mobility issues add even more complexity, therethey're part of our life now and they're everywhere. So again, networkingis complex because there are many standards that have to communicate.  A local area network or LAN can seem quite simple, as it uses a singlehardware software standard to communicate, but when you try tocommunicate to other networks outside of your home or business thecomplexity goes up dramatically. You have to traverse through multiplenetworks using multiple standards and we'll see that this istime-consuming, and we’ll see how this is handled and it's an area ofactive research. So, in order to handle the complexity in this course, I mean not tohandle the complexity of networking but to handle the complexity ofstudying networking, we're going to concentrate on abstractions andconcepts to unravel the complexity. The theoretical part is probably notas difficult to handle as the implementation, so we'll use a few exampletechnologies, how we can implement communication using thesetechnologies, we’ll use some hands-on lab experience to reinforce theconcepts, we'll be working with Wireshark to look at some of theprotocols and standards and how they interact. So we begin with the most fundamental definitions: a network is a systemfor connecting computers using a single transmission technology, bycontrast the internet is a set of networks, connected by routers, thatare configured to communicate among a variety of network transmissiontechnologies.  In summary, the internet is a network of networks. We have a variety of devices that connect to the edge of the internet.This would be your PC, your wireless laptop, your smartphone, maybe evenyour car, but the the edge also includes servers of all types and theycommunicate using a variety of different media. We have fiber, opticalfiber, copper radio, satellite. So, we, and finally the core of theinternet is composed of a number of routers and these routers are packetswitches. Packets are discrete units of data that contain informationabout their source, destination, and the actual data being transmitted.Routers and switches forward these packets from one point to anotheracross the internet. And they just perform this job over and overbillions and billions of times a day. We're going to focus on four things in this class that are notnecessarily in this order. We'll talk about transmission- how the data isset up to be sent and over what it is to be sent. We'll talk about,especially, packet transmission where the data came from, where it'sgoing, how to respond and so on, we'll also be talking aboutcommunication protocols which make the packet transmission possible, thisis a fairly complicated area. We will look at TCP, IP and UDP and someother lower-level networking protocols. We’ll be looking at the internet– especially how does the core of the internet work, how does routingtake place? How are packets stored and forwarded to their correctdestination. And we'll also look at internet applications and we'll talkabout some well-known applications and a little about client-serverinteraction and we'll write a few applications ourselves that will useseveral of the protocols to communicate.So, in the real world, the whole idea of the internet started out with afew universities and the kinds of communication they needed to do variousbodies of research. This also started out with support from DARPA theDefense Advanced Research Projects Agency, so the internet like manyearly computing technologies has its roots in the military and when itstarted to grow it grew exponentially, it grew very fast and there was noreal control system or centralized authority set up for it. There aresome controls now in place and there are authorities set up, though theyare not centralized, and there are always debates about whether thegovernment should have more or less control but around the world thegrowth is rapid and continuous.Here are two of the most important networking standards that make theinternet possible: ethernet made local area networking possible. A network, again, is comprised of a single transmission technology andwhat was needed to make the internet possible was a way to communicateacross many different networks. So, the TCP/IP protocol is what appearedon the scene that made this Internet working possible. It lets uscommunicate between networks and this by definition is the internet. So, the growth of the internet has had a huge impact on business and ourlives. As our computing change from centralized to distributed it changedour way of life, now we have different ways of doing our jobs differentways of doing business. On a personal level it's almost a certainty thatyou will use the internet every single day. and of course, this classcomes to you as a courtesy of the internet and as the Internet grew itbecame clear that we needed ways to ensure reliability, robustness, andscalability. Reliability means that there are ways to ensure that datawon't be lost or corrupted and that we receive exactly what was sent.Robustness means recovery from errors, and scalability means that we canadd more hosts, more LANs more routers newer equipment etc. withouthaving to redesign the whole system. On the internet we may have multiplelinks in the system and the responsibility for routing packets throughthe system is distributed throughout the system and this is one way thatscalability is ensured and that is another part of the exponential growthof the internet. The internet started in the 60s as a research project betweenuniversities. By 1981 there were 213 hosts on the Internet, that is therewere 213 computers on the edge of the internet at the variousuniversities. Here are some numbers for different users in different parts of theworld, you may want to look this over and compare with the next slidewhich shows the percentages, these graphs go all the way up to nearly thepresent and in this slide these are the percentages. Note that in NorthAmerica we have nearly 93.4% of the population using the internet. So the internet has had tremendous economic impact. of course, theinternet is famous for both job creation but also disruption and the lossof traditional jobs. Many brick-and-mortar stores have been forced toclose as entire industries have moved online. But Overall however theinternet has been a net positive driver of the economy. Now let’s turn our focus to internet standards.  After a while it becameobvious that there had to be some common standards even though theinternet was not under central control. a task group created a centralrepository for technical papers. These papers helped companies andresearch groups to integrate new technologies with existing standards.So, this is a very important part of the Internet. This repository allowseveryone to see what others are doing as they are doing. and as newstandards are developed, they may obsolete older standards, andeverything is built in some way on what came before. So, this is whereyou're going to go if you need to find the adopted standards fornetworking, maybe you are interested in creating a new protocol built onother protocols or you're just looking up some information. The IETFcreates RFC documents, that's request for comments, and these RFCdocuments describe those the adopted standards and then normally thehardware and software companies and the website providers will be goodinternet citizens and will follow these standards.let's delve a bit into the metrics and units commonly used in networking,particularly when it comes to speed, file sizes, and their respectiveconversions. For speed, distance over time, we have things measured inelectronic units and for speed where K as a thousand M is a million andso forth.Megabits per Second (Mbps):  is a standard unit for measuring the speedof data transmission. It represents the number of bits that can betransmitted in one second. For example, 8 Mbps equals 8 million bits persecond. File Sizes: On the other hand when we talk about computer filesor memory, we use the binary prefixes for kilo, mega, and giga in thecontext of data storage and transmission. In the International System ofUnits (SI), these prefixes traditionally represent powers of 10 (1,000,1,000,000, 1,000,000,000, etc.). However, in the context of computing anddigital information, binary prefixes based on powers of 2 are often used.And units are kibi, mebi and gibi. Gigabytes (GiB) is a unit of digital information storage. 200 GiB(gibibyte) is equivalent to 2^30 bytes, or 1,073,741,824 bytes.We can convert to bits; we multiply the size in by 8 (as there are 8 bitsin a byte). Now here are some Abbreviations: Bits (lowercase b): is thebasic unit of digital information, representing a binary digit (0 or1).Bytes (capital B): A group of 8 bits. It is often used to represent acharacter or a unit of storage. Here is another conversion Example:1mebibit (Mib) is equivalent to 2^20 bits. Which is equal to 2^10kibibits.  To convert to kibibytes (KB), you would divide by 8 (as thereare 8 bits in a byte) and you will get 128 kibibytes. Understanding theseunits and their conversions is essential in networking for describingdata transmission rates, storage capacities, and other related metrics.You should practice some more examples. And that's the end of the first lecture so we've seen a broad overview ofmany of the topics we will discuss in more depth later and that's it. 