In the last lecture, we saw how circuit switch networks could bemultiplexed or shared. In this lecture, we will see what packet switchinggives us in terms of multiplexing and network utilization. Let’s first see why circuit multiplexing, especially techniques like TimeDivision Multiplexing (TDM) and Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM),are not well-suited for packet-switching networks. Internet applications,such as web browsing, voice traffic (with talk and silence spurts), andvideo traffic (with scene changes), often exhibit bursty behavior. Thismeans that data is not continuously transmitted but rather inintermittent bursts.  Bursty traffic patterns result in an average datatransfer rate that is much lower than the peak rate.  During periods ofinactivity or low data transmission, the allocated network capacity incircuit-switching systems most probably be underutilized.So, packet switching gives us something called statistical multiplexing.Here we have two users wanting to send data through the network. Theirpackets have been queued at the first router waiting for an output linkand then they will be sent out in the order that they were received, andthis is known as statistical multiplexing. With statistical multiplexing,the sequence of packets sent from two or more senders does not have tohave a fixed pattern.  By contrast with circuit switching, in timedivision multiplexing for instance, each host will get the same time slotperiodically and in frequency division multiplexing, each host gets thesame bandwidth continuously and with either of these a limited number ofhosts get exclusive use of one slot or channel. With statisticalmultiplexing, during periods of high demand, more resources can beallocated to active users, optimizing the use of bandwidth, and ensuringefficient data transmission. Let’s understand this concept better withexamples. So here, we see with circuit switching that if only one host is sendingyet two are sharing the network, you have at best 50 percent utilization.By contrast with packet switching, if only one host is sending, then thepackets from that host will be sent out as fast as they are received. Andso we can approach 100 percent utilization in this manner.Packet switching does have some additional overhead however as we'll seecoming up. So let's look at some numbers for utilization.  To review inour scenario here, we have some users or hosts that are each active about10 percent of the time.  In a circuit-switched network with 10 users,each user is allocated 0.1 Mbps when active. This allocation is based ona fixed, predetermined division of the total network capacity. Thenetwork capacity is fully utilized when all 10 users are activesimultaneously, ensuring that each gets their allocated share. Whereas ina packet-switched network with 35 users, the probability that more than10 users are active simultaneously is very low (less than 0.0004). So,packet-switched network efficiently utilizes the available capacity bydynamically allocating resources based on user demand. This adaptabilityleads to a performance level nearly equivalent to the circuit-switchedscenario with 10 users.  Now the question is how did we come up with thenumber 0.0004? In the given scenario, we are dealing with a binomial probabilitydistribution to calculate the chance that more than 10 users are activeout of 35 users. To understand the concept let’s start with a smallerexample.  But first let’s define the distribution formula. Theprobability mass function (PMF) for the binomial distribution is given bythis formula. (N choose  X?) represents the binomial coefficient, whichis the number of ways to choose X successes out of N trials. Let’s comeback to our users and active user setting.  Let’s solve this problem ofWith N =  3 users,  and  p = 1/3   that means (1/3 time a user will beactive) . What is the chance that only 1 user is active? The expression Prob of [(A is active &&B,C not)??(B active &&A,C not)??(C active &&A,B not),  represents the probability that at leastone user is active out of A, B, and C. So we represent this expression asthe sum of three probabilities: and further we simplify it using theprobability p that a user is active and (1?p) that a user is not active:which equals p(1?p)(1?p)+p(1?p)(1?p)+p(1?p)(1?p)Combining like terms, we get:3p(1?p)2 = from our example  3. 1/3. (2/3)2 = 4/9 Therefore, the chancethat only 1 user is active is 4/9?.This expression represents the probability that at least one user isactive out of 3, given the individual probabilities of each user beingactive or not.Now for calculating the probability of a specific number of users beingactive in a system of N users, given the probability p. We firstcalculate the Probability of Only 1 User Active (out of N users): TheprobabilityP (only 1 user active) equals this expression N? p?(1?p)N?1How about not only 1, say we are interested in finding the probability ofk out of N users. Let’s see this example.  With N=3 users, what is thechance that any 2 users are active? Once again, like the previous example, we can have three optionsavailable where any 2 of the 3 users (say A, B.C are active one is not. We get this formula (highlighted on the slide) . So, when we generalize the formula, the Probability of Any k Users Active(out of N users):Is equal to (n choose k)? pk (since k uses are active) times ?(1?p)N-k(which is the number of remaining inactive users). Let’s come back to our example. Trust me, we are almost there! So, wehave 35 users, the probability of being active is p=0.1, and we areinterested to find the probability of exactly 10 users active. We plug inthe value and get this (35 choose 10?)?(0.1)10?(0.9)25 Now Probability of More than 10 Users equals 1?(P(exactly 10 usersare active) - (exactly 9 users are active) -  we keep going all the wayup to (exactly 0 users are active))We first find the probability of each case separately and then take theirsum to find the Probability of at most 10 Users Active.  We can then useit here. And will find that this equals to 0.0004. Using the binomial coefficient probability p, and the complement rule wecan find probabilities for different scenarios in a system with multipleusers.Now, your job is to find out whether it is really 0.0004 and I know thatyou can do this ??! So, we have seen that packet switching offers high utilization. but thisis not to say that packet switching doesn't have drawbacks or issues orthat circuit switching is always a bad thing. While packet switching hasbecome predominant in today's internet, it is not without challenges.Network congestion is acknowledged as a potential issue, especiallyduring times of high user activity, such as the release of a popularshow. In such scenarios, an increase in queued packets at routers maylead to packet loss, data retransmission, jitters and the worst-casescenario of gridlock.The ongoing research efforts aim to imbue packet-switched networks withcircuit-like behavior, addressing concerns related to congestion andensuring a more reliable and efficient network. That’s it, we are donehere!