Hello again.  Right now you should have completed the module on Confucianism, so we're moving on to the  second major tradition that we'll be looking at, which is Daoism.  Before I start talking about the readings themselves though, I want to just sort of remind  you that Dao, spelled with a D, and Dao, spelled with a T, are exactly the same thing.  They are just simply different ways of writing the same Chinese character in Roman letters,  so don't let that confuse you.  Okay, Daoism.  Daoism is, along with Confucianism, clearly one of the most famous early Chinese philosophical  religious systems, right?  It's been deeply influential in across Chinese culture, and also in the Western world, particularly  over the last century or so, as translations of some early Daoist works became widely available.  The most famous early Daoist is clearly Lao Tzu, okay?  He wrote a work called the Dao Dijing, which is clearly the most famous early Daoist text.  You may have noticed, if you read the syllabus carefully, we're not going to read it.  The reason we're not going to read it is because while it's very famous, it's also very  abstract, frankly difficult to read and understand, particularly in a short time frame.  So instead of reading Lao Tzu, we're going to read Zhuang Tzu.  Zhuang Tzu, whose work is best known under his own name, just called the Zhuang Tzu, was  another early, early Daoist philosopher wrote and lived fairly close to Lao Tzu a couple  of centuries later as far as we can tell, but his writings are much easier for most of us  to wrap our heads around and to really understand, particularly again in a short time frame.  So for that reason, this class we're going to be focused on Zhuang Tzu.  We've divided up our reading of Zhuang Tzu into two sections.  In the first section, what you're going to do for this reading, what I really want you  to focus on is this question of the Dao, okay?  Sometimes translate it as the way or the path, and I want you to really think about what  does Zhuang Tzu mean by the Dao, okay?  You know, we have this image of a way or a path and it might seem fairly straightforward,  I don't know, this is the way you go, but actually it's a really complicated idea, right?  Well how do you go that way?  What does one do following the path?  Does the path have agency, meaning like does the path do things or is the path completely  passive, is the path even a thing or is it purely a metaphor, okay?  Think about these kinds of questions, don't just sort of get, it's easy, I would say,  to get wrapped up in Zhuang Tzu in these sort of fun stories and the joy of just sort  of turning things on their head a little bit, being counterintuitive, so on and so forth.  But what I really want you to do is to try to get beyond that and try to really think  critically about what exactly is Zhuang Tzu proposing, what is his system like?  And again, like we asked with Confucius, what are some of the repercussions of that?  What does that mean if that's our understanding of, or if that's Zhuang Tzu's understanding  of the world?  Okay, enjoy and I'll see you again shortly.