?  INTRODUCTION



All we know about the identity of Chuang Tzu, or Master Chuang, are the few facts recorded in the brief notice given him in the Shih chi or Records of the Historian (ch. 63) by Ssu-ma Ch'ien (145?-89? B.c.). According to this account, his personal name was Chou, he was a native of a place called Meng, and he once served as "an official in the lacquer garden" in Meng. Ssu-ma Ch'ien adds that he lived at the same time as King Hui (370-319 B.c.) of Liang and King Hsiian (319- 301 B.C.) of Ch'i, which would make him a contemporary of Mencius, and that he wrote a work in roo,ooo words or more which was "mostly in the nature of fable." A certain number of anecdotes concerning Chuang Tzu appear in the book that bears his name, though it is difficult, in view of the deliberate fant.asy that characterizes the book as a ..,,,hole, to regard these as reliable biography.
Scholars disagree as to whether "lacquer garden" is the name of a specific location, or simply means lacquer groves in gen­ eral, and the location of Meng is uncertain, though it was prob­ ably in present-day Honan, south of the Yellow River. If this last supposition is correct, it means that Chuang Chou was a
.native of the state of Sung, a fact which may have important implications.
When the Chon people of western China conquered and replaced the Shang or Yin dynasty around the eleventh cen­ tury B.c., they enfeoffed the descendants of the Shang kings as ruiers of the region of Sung in eastern Honan, in order that
2	Chuang Tm
they might carry on the sacrifices to their illustrious ancestors. Though Sung was never an important state, it managed to maintain its existence throughout the long centuries of the Chou dynasty until 286 n.c., when it was overthrown by three of its neighbors and its territory divided up among them. It is natural to suppose that not only the ruling house, but many of the citizens of Sung as well, were descended from the Shang people, and that they preserved to some extent the rites, cus­
toms, and ways of thought that had been characteristic of Shang culture. The Book of Ocles, it may be noted, contains five "Hymns of Shang" which deal with the legends of the Shang royal family and which scholars agree were either com­ posed or handed down by the rulers of the state of Sung. Sung
led a precarious existence, constantly invaded or threatened by more powerful neighbors, and in later centuries its weak­ ness was greatly aggravated by incessant internal strife, the ruling house of Sung possessing a history unrivaled for its bloodiness even in an age of disorder. Its inhabitants, as de­ scendants of the conquered Shang people, were undoubtedly despised and oppressed by the more powerful states which be­ longed to the lineage of the Chou conquerors, and the "man of Sung" appears in the literature of late Chou times as a stock figure of the ignorant simpleton.
All these facts of Sung life-the preservation of the legends and religious beliefs of the Shang people, the political and social oppression, the despair born of weakness and strife­ may go far to elucidate the background from which Chuang Tzu's thought sprang, and to explain why, in its skepticism and mystical detachment, it differs so radically from Confu­ cianism, the basically optimistic and strongly political-minded philosophy which developed in the Chou lineage states of Lu
and Ch'i. But since we know so little about the Jife and iden-
Introduction	3
tity of Chuang Chou or his connection with the book that bears his name, it is perhaps best not to seek too assiduously to establish a direct causal connection between the background and the philosophy.
Whoever Chuang Chou was, the writings attributed to him bear the stamp of a brilliant and original mind. Instead of speculating upon the possible sources from which this mind drew its ideas, let us turn to an examination of the ideas them­ selves. I shall simply state that from here on, when I speak of Chuang Tzu, I am referring not to a specific individual known to us through history, but to the mind, or group of minds, re­ vealed in the text called Chuang Tzu, particularly the first seven sections of that text.
The central theme of the Chuang T zu may be summed up
in a single word: freedom. Essentially, all the philosophers of ancient China addressed themselves to the same problem: how is man to live in a world dominated by chaos, suffering, and absurdity? Nearly all of them answered with some concrete plan of action designed to reform the individual, to reform society, and eventually to free the world from its ills. The pro­ posals put forward by the Confucians, the Mo-ists, and the Legalists, to name some of the principal schools of philosophy, are all different, but all are based upon the same kind of com­ mon-sense approach to the problem, and all seek for concrete social, political, and ethical reforms to solve it. Chuang Tzu's answer, however, the answer of one branch of the Taoist school, is radically different from these, and is grounded upon a wholly different type of thinking. It is the answer of a mystic, and in attempting to describe it here in clear and concrete lan­ g11age, I shall undoubtedly be doing violence to its essentially mystic and indescribable nature. Chuang Tzu's answer to the question is: free yourself from the world.
4	Chuang Tzu
What doe!> he mean by this? In a section not translated here (sec. 23), he tells the story of a man named Nan-jung Chu who went to visit the Taoist sage Lao Tzu in hopes of finding some solution to his worries. When he appeared, Lao Tzu promptly inquired, "Why did you come with all this crowd of people?" The man whirled around in astonishment to see if there was someone standing behind him. Needless to say, there was not; the "crowd of people" that he came with was the bag­ gage of old ideas, the conventional concepts of right and wrong, good and bad, life and death, that he lugged about with him wberev?r he went.
It is this baggage of conventional values that man must first of all discard before he can be free. Chuang Tzu saw the same human sufferings that Confucius, Mo Tzu, and Mencius saw. He saw the man-made ills of war, poverty, and injustice. He saw the natural ills of disease and death. Hut he believed that they were ills only because man recognized them as such. If
man would once forsake his habit of labeling things good or bad, desirable or undesirable, then the man-made ills, which are the product of man's purposeful and value-ridden actions, would disappear and the natural ills that remain would no longer be seen as ills, but as an inevitable part of the course of life. Thus, in Chuang Tzu's eyes, man is the author of his own suffering and bondage, and all his fears spring from the web of values created by himself alone. Chuang T7.U sums up this whole diseased, fear-struck condition of mankind in the macabre metaphor cf the leper woman who, "when she gives birth to a child in the deep of the night, rushes to fetch a torch and examine it, trembling with terror lest it look like herself" (sec. 12).
But how is one to persuade the leper woman that disease and ugliness are mere labels that have no real validity? It is no
lntroduction	5
easy task, and for this reason the philosophy of Chuang Tzu, like most mystical philosophies, has seldom been fully under­ stood and embraced in its pure form by more than a small minority. /lvlost of the philosophies of ancient China are ad­ dressed to the political or intellectual elite; Chuang Tzu's is addressed to the spiritual elite.
Difficult though the task may be, however, Chuang Tzu employs every resource of rhetoric in his efforts to awaken the reader to the essential meaninglessness of conventional values and to free him from their bondage. One device he uses to great effect is the pointed or paradoxical anecdote, the non sequitur or apparently nonsensical remark that jolts the mind into awareness of a truth outside the pale of ordinary logic­ a device familiar to Western readers of Chinese and Japanese Zen literature. The other device most common in his writings is the pseudological discussion or debate that starts out sound­ ing completely rational and sober, and ends by reducing lan­ guage to a gibbering inanity. These two devices will be found in their purest form in the first two sections of the Chuang Tzu, which together constitute one of the fiercest and most dazzling assaults ever made not only upon man's conventional system of values, but upon his conventional concepts of time, space, reality, and causation as well.
Finally, Chuang Tzu uses throughout his writings that deadliest of weapons against all that is p0mpous, staid, and holy: humor. Most Chinese philosophers employ humor spar­ ingly-a wise decision, no doubt, in view of the serious tone they seek to maintain-and some of them seem never to have heard of it at all. Chuang Tzu, on the contrary, makes it the very core of his style, for he appears to have known that one good laugh would do n,ore thdn ten pages of harangue to shake the reader's confidence in the validity of his pat as:;umptions.


6	Chuang Tzu
In Chuang Tzu's view, the man who has freed himself from conventional standards of judgment can no longer be made to suffer, for he refuses to recognize poverty as any less desirable than affiuence, to recognize death as any less desirable than life. He does not in any literal sense withdraw and hide from the world-to do so would show that he still passed judgment upon the world. He remains within society but refrains from acting out of the motives that lead ordinary men to struggle for wealth, fame, success, or safety. He maintains a state that Chuang Tzu refers to as wu-wei, or inaction, meaning by this term not a forced quietude, but a course of action that is not founded upon any purposeful motives of gain or striving. In such a state, all human actions become as spontaneous and mindless as those of the natural world. Man becomes one with Nature, or Heaven, as Chuang Tzu calls it, and merges him­ self with Tao, or the Way, the underlying unity that embraces man, Nature, and all that is in the universe.
To describe this mindless, purposeless mode of life, Chuang
Tzu turns most of ten to the analogy of the artist or craftsman. The skilled woodcarver, the skilled butcher, the skilled swim­ mer does not ponder or ratiocinate on the course of action he should take; his skill has become so much a part of him that he merely acts instinctively and spontaneously and, without knowing why, achieves success. Again, Chuang Tzu employs the metaphor of a totally free and purposeless journey, using the word yu (to wander, or a wandering) to designate the way in which the enlightened man wanders through all of creation, enjoying its delights without ever becoming attached to any one part of it.
But, like all mystics, Chuang Tzu insists that language is in the end grievously inadequate to describe the true Way, or the wonderful freedom of the man who has realized his identity
•,vith it. Again and again, he cautions that he is giving only a "rough" or "reckless" description of these things, and what fol­ lows is usually a passage of highly poetic and paradoxical lan­ guage that in fact conveys little more than the essential in­ effability of such a state of being.
These mystical passages, with their wild and whirling words, need not puzzle the reader if he recognizes them for what they are, but there is one aspect of them that calls for comment. Often Chuang Tzu describes the Taoist sage or enlightened man in terms which suggest that he possesses magical powers,
that he moves in a trancelike state, that he is impervious to all harm and perhaps even immortal. In these descriptions, Chuang Tzu is probably drawing upon the language of ancient Chinese religion and r..agic, and there were undoubtedly men
in his day, as there were in later centuries, who believed that such magical powers, including the power to become immortal, were attainable. I am inclined to believe that Chuang Tzu­ that is, the author of the most profound and penetrating por­ tions of the book which bears his name-intended these de­ scriptions to be taken metaphorically. But there is evidence elsewhere in the Chuang Tzu that they were taken literally, and countless followers of the Taoist school in later ages cer­ tainly interpreted them that way. Perhaps, as Arthur Waley says, the best approach is not to attempt to draw any sharp line between rationalism and superstition, between philosophy and magic, but to be prepared to find them mingled and overlap­ ping. After all, it is the dra1;ving of forced and unnatural dis­ tinctions that Chuang Tzu most vehemently condemns. In the end, the best way to approach Chuang Tzu, I believe, is not to attempt to subject his thought to rational and systematic analysis, but to read and reread his words until one has ceased to think of what he is saying and instead has developed an in-
8	Clwang T zu
tt:itive seme of the mind moving behind the words, and of tl1e world in which it moves.

Chuang Tzu, along with Lao Tzu, or Lao Tan, has long been revered as one of the founders of the Taoist school. Be­ cause it was believed that Lao Tzu was a contemporary of Confucius and that he was the author of the book known as the Lao T zu or T ao-te-ching, he has been honored as the prime patriarch of the school, and Chuang Tzu as a later dis­ ciple and continuer of his doctrines. Most scholars now agree that it is impossible to say whether Lao Tzu ever lived or, if he did, to determine exactly when. He appears in the pages of the Chuang Tzu as one of a riumbcr of Taoist sages, but this sig­ nifies very little, since so many of the figures in Chuang Tzu's writings are clearly fictitious. Chuang Tzu at no point make:.; any reference to the T ao-te-cliing; there are a few places where he uses language that is similar to or identical with that of the T ao-te-ching, but these do not prove that one text is earlier than the other, or that there is any direct connection between them. Moreover, Chuang Tzu's brand of Taoism, as often
po:nted out, is in many respects guite different from that ex­ pounded in the Tao-te-ching. Therefore, though the two may have drawn upon common sources, and certainly became fused in later times, it seems best to consider them separately­ which is why I have not discussed the philosophy of the Tao­ te-ching here. There is much disagreement among ?cholars as to when the Tao-te-ching attained its present form, though it is safe to assume, I believe, that both the Chuang Tzu and the Tao-te-ching circulated in something like their present form from the second century Il.C. on, that is, from the begin­ ning of the Han dynasty (102 n.c.-A.D. 220).
In the early years of the Han dynasty, the T ao-te-ching,
prob:.ibly because of its brevity and relative simplicity of lan­ guage, seems to ha·,re enjoyed grca?cr popularity than the Chuang Tzu. It is repeatedly quoted or alluded to in the litera­ ture of the period, and several influential statesmen of the time, inclu<ling a strong-willed empress dowager, advocated
its doctrines. The court official Ssu-ma Tan (d. 110 B.c.), father of the historian Ssu-ma Ch'ien, wrote a brief Pssay, "A Discussion of the Essentials of the Six Schools," in which he reviewed the doctrines of the most important philosophical
schools of the time and came out strongly in favor of Taoism. The H uai-nan T zu, an eclectic work compiled by scholars of the court of Liu An (d. 122 B.c.), theking of Huai-nan, dates from the same period; it includes many excerpts from the Chuang Tzu and Lao Tzu and, like Ssu-ma Tan, reserves the highest praise fer the teachings of the Taoist school.
In spite of this relative popularity, however, Taoism was
gradually overshadowed by Confucianism, which won official recognition from tlie Han emperor toward the end of the sec­ ond century B.C. and was declared the orthodox philosophy of the state, with a go1_1ernment university set up in the capital to teach Its doctrines to prospective officials. This did not mean that Taoist writings were in any way suppressed. People were still free to read and study them, and we may be sure that educated men of the Han continued to savor the literary genius of Chuang Tzu and Lao Tzu as they had in the past. It simply meant that Taoist writings were not accorded any official recognition as the basis for decisions on state and public alfairs.
In the intellectual world of late Chou times, a number of
rival doctrines had contended for supremacy, and the thinkers of the age had frequently attacked each other with vigor and asperity. Mo Tzu had denounced Confucianism, Mencius and
zo	Chuang Tzu
Hsi.in Tzu had denounced Mo-ism, and the Legalist philoso­ pher Han Fei Tzu had denounced both doctrines. Chuang Tzu had spent a certain amount of time attacking the philoso­ phers of other schools-the pompously moralistic Confucians and Mo-ists, the Logicians Hui Shih and Kung-sun Lung with their hairsplitting semantics-though his customary weapon was parody and ridicule rather than polemic.
But by the first century B.c., many of the old sharp differ­ ences of opinion had been forgotten or softened by time. Mo­ ism and the School of Logic had all but disappeared from the intellectual scene, and the principal battle was between the two rival philosophies of government: Confucianism, nom­ inally the official doctrine of the state, with its emphasis upon moral guidance of the people, and Legalism, which stressed regimentation through stern and detailed laws and held a strong attraction for the totalitarian-minded rulers and states­ men of the time. Taoism, being basically apoiitical, remained in the background, to be drawn upon by either side, though in Han times it was more often the Confucian scholars who utilized the Taoist concept of inaction to oppose the state monopolies and other large-scale government enterprises ad­ vocated by the Legalist-min<led officials.1
One should therefore think of Confucianism and Taoism in Han times not as rival systems demanding a choice for one side or the other, but rather as two complementary doctrines, an ethical and political system for the conduct of public and family life, and a mystical philosophy for the spiritual nourish-
' See, for example, the Yen-t'ieh-lun, or Debates on Salt and Iron, sec. 57, where the Confucian literati quote Lao Tzu to support their ideal of laissez· faire government. Similarly, they quote or refer to Mo-ist teachings when they wish to emphasize frugality and the need to reduce government ex· penditures.
Introduction	I I
ment of the individual, with the metaphysical teachings of the
Book of Changes acting as a bridge between the two.
This approach is well exemplified in the lives of two schol­ ars, Shu Kuang and his nephew Shu Shou, students of the Confucian Classics who served as tutors to the heir apparent of Emperor Hsuan (r. 74-49 E.c.), instructing him in the Analects and the Classic of Filial Piety. When Shu Kuang felt he had reached the pinnacle of success and honor, he an­ nounced, in the words of Lao Tzu, that "he who knows what is enough will not be shamed; he who knows where to stop will not be in danger." He and his nephew then petitioned the emperor for release from their official duties and, when it had been granted, retired to the country. (Han shu 71.)
Or, to turn from officialdom to the world of private citizens, we may note the case of a scholar named Yen Chiin-p'ing of the region of Szechwan, who made his living as a diviner in the market place of Ch'eng-tu. He admitted that this was a rather lowly occupation, but explained that he pursued it "be­ cause I can thereby benefit the common people. When men come to me with questions about something that is evil or im­ proper, I use the oracle as an excuse to advise them on what is right. I advise sons to be filial, younger brothers to be obedient, subjects to be loyal, utilizing whatever the circumstances may be to lead the people to what is right-and over half of them follow my advice!" So Yen Chun-p'ing spent his days instruct­ ing the people, in this ingenious fashion, in the dictates of conventional morality. But when he had made enough money for one day, "he shut up his stall, lowered the blinds, and gave instruction in the Lao Tzu" (Han shu 72). He was the author of a work, which was based on the doctrines of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu, and was a teacher of the most eminent
Confucian philosopher of the time, Yang Hsiung (53 B.c.­
A.D. 18).
Thus, like so many Chinese of later centuries, these men of the Han were both Confucians and Taoists by turns, depend­ ing upon which doctrine was appropriate to their particular activities or phase of life, and in this way they contrived, with considerable success, to enjoy the best of two superb philoso­ phies.
Ccnfucianism continued to receive official support and to dominate the intellectual life of China during the remaining centuries of the Han dynasty. With the decay and final col­ lapse of the dynasty in A.D. 220, the empire split into three rival kingdoms and entered upon an era of strife and disunion, aggravated by repeated foreign invasion, that was to last until the Sui once more unified China in A.n. 581. Though Taoism had by no means been forgotten during the long years of the Han, the shock occasioned by the downfall of the dynasty and the political disorder which ensued led men to reexamine the texts of Taoism and the other ancient schools of philosophy with fresh interest to see if their teachings could be used in some way to supplement or correct the tenets of Confucianism, which had to some extent been discredited or called into doubt by the fall of the dynasty that had espoused them. The gradual spread of Buddhism during these same centuries helped to foster this revival of interest in Taoism, often referred to as Neo-Taoism, because so many of the doctrines of the Indian religion appeared, on the surface at least, to be strikingly sim­ ilar to those of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu.
At this time the philosophy of Chuang Tzu came to be studied and appreciated to a degree unknown before. Its un· conventionality and skepticism appealed to an age of disorder in which conventional moral standards seemed to have lost all
Introduction	1 3
validity; its implications of a spiritual elite who could tran­ scend the bonds of the world and wander in a realm beyond life and death-whether such release was interpreted meta­ phorically or literally-appealed to a society dominated by aris­ tocratic tastes. It was an age of ferment, of widening intel­ lectual horizons, in many ways like that of Chuang Tzu him­ self, and one in which Chuang Tzu's mystic vision of freedom seemed to make better sense than it ever had during the staid and stable years of the Han empire.
Our present version of the Chuang Tzu dates from this pe­ riod and was edited by Kuo Hsiang (d. A.D. 312), one of the leaders of the Neo-Taoist movement. Kuo Hsiang appended a commentary to the text, the oldest commentary now in exist·
ence, which may in part be the work of a predecessor, Hsiang Hsiu, who lived in the first half of the third century AD. In any event, it is the text and commentary of Kuo Hsiang's edi­ tion of the Chiumg Tzu that form the basis for all our present
versions of the work.
The bibliography compiled at the end of the first century
B.c. and preserved in the "Treatise on Literature" of the Han shu lists a Chuang Tzu in 52 sections. When Kuo Hsiang compiled his edition some three centuries later, he discarded a number of sections which he considered to be inferior and of patently spurious nature, and settled upon a text consisting of 33 sections. These he divided into three groups in the fol­ lowing order: seven sections called nei-p'ien, or "inner chap­ ters," I 5 sections called wai-p'ien, or "outer chapters," and 11 sections called tsa-p'ien, or "miscellaneous chapters." T'ne titles of the "inner chapters" are descriptive of the theme of the chapter as a whole, and were probably affixed by the writer himself. TI10se of the "outer" and "miscellaneous" chapters, on the other hand, are taken from the opening words of the
chapter and often have little to do with the chapter as a whole, suggesting that they were added later and that these chapters are in some cases more in the nature of collections of frag­ ments.
It is generally agreed that the seven "inner chapters," all of which are translated here, constitute the heart of the Chuang T zu. They contain all the important ideas, are written in a brilliant and distinctive-though difficult-style, and are prob­ ably the earliest in date, though so far no way has been found to prove this last assumption. Whether they are the work of the man called Chuang Chou we do not know, but they are certainly in the main the product of a superbly keen and original mind, though they may contain brief interpolations by other hands. The remainder of the Chuang T zu is a mixture, sections of which may be as old-they are at times almost as brilliant-as the "inner chapters," sections of which may date from as late as the third or fourth centuries A.D. Though they contain many interesting anecdotes and passages of discussion which serve to expand and illustrate the ideas of the "inner chapters," they add little to the philosophy of the Chuang T zu as a whole, and what they do add is often suspiciously foreign to the spirit of the "inner chapters."
Waley, in his discussion of the authorship of the Chuang T zu, states that "some parts are by a splendid poet, others are by a feeble scribbler" (Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China, p. 256). Anyone who reads the original with any sensi­ tivity to style will, I believe, readily agree with this observa­ tion; parts of the book are as humdrum and repetitious as others are inspired. In making my own selection, I have nat­ urally tried to avoid the feeble scribbler at all cost. This is not always easy to do in the latter sections of the Chuang Tzu, however, because the scribbler and the poet are occasionally
to be found side by side within a single chapter. I have trans­ lated three sections from the "outer chapters" that seem to me to be of particular interest, and one section from the "miscel­ laneous chapters," making a total of 11 sections. A few other sections that I would like to have included are so marred by textual corruption that I did not feel confident enough to undertake a translation (and textual uncertainties present a serious problem even in the sections I have translated, as is pointed out in my notes).
Though a considerable amount of critical work has been
done on the text of the Chuang Tzu, and there is an almost endless number of commentaries, the meaning of many pas­ sages remains a matter of doubt. There are two reasons for this: the intrinsic difficulty of Chuang Tzu's language and thought, and the textual corruption that has arisen, almost inevitably, we may suppose, in the course of the transmission of such a difficult text.
Chuang Tzu, as I have said, rejects all conventional values, and as a result, like so many mystical writers, he rejects the conventional values of words as well, deliberately employing them to mean the opposite of what they ordinarily mean in order to demonstrate their essential meaninglessness. When a writer does this, he of course invites misunderstanding, no matter how dazzling the literary effect he achieves. This is what has happened to Chuang Tzu. His grammar is regular enough; his sentence patterns are for the most part like those of other writers of the period; but, because what he says is so often the direct opposite of what anyone else would say, com­ mentators have again and again been led to wonder if he really does not mean something other than what he says, or if the text is perhaps corrupt.
To give an example, in order to pry men loose from their
conventional concepts of goodness and beauty, Chuang Tzu deliberately glorifies everything that tc ordinary eyes appears sordid, base, or bizarre--ex-criminals who have suffered mu­ tilating punishments, men who are horribly ugly or deformed, creature!. of grotesque shape or size. To illustrate the point­ and because the passage is so important in Taoist philosophy­ let me quote one of Chuang Tzu's most famous descriptions of the Tao or the Way:
Master T:mg-kuo asked Chuang Tzu, 'This thing called the Way-where does it exist?"
Chuang Tzu said, "There's no place it doesn't exist."
"Come," sa'1d Master Tung-kuo, "you must
cific!"
"It is in the ant."
"As low a thing as that?" "It is in the panic grass." "But that's lower still!"
"It is in the tiles and shards." "How can it be so low?"
"It is in the piss and shit." (sec. 22)
be more spe-
But if, in Chuang Tzu's language, ugly stands for beautiful, or something beyond both beauty and ugliness, and bad stands for good, or something beyond it, then what do beautiful and good stand for? In other words, since Chuang Tzu deliberately turns the values of words upside down, how are we ever to know for certain when he is sincerely praising something? This is the most serious problem one encounters in the inter­ pretation of Taoist writings, as it is in the interpretation of the writings of Zen Buddhism. In any given passage, is the writer, regardless of what words he uses, describing a state of affairs that is in his eyes commendable or uncommendable? Depend-
ing upon how one answers this question, the interpretation of the entire passage will differ radically. (An example of this problem is pointed out in note 4 to section 3.)
In translating the other philosophers in this series, I have
allowed myself considerable freedom, because I was reasonably confident that I understood what they were saying, and be­ cause the exact wording of the original did not seem to be of such vital importance. I have proceeded differently in the case of Chuang Tzu. Chuang Tzu, as has often been pointed out, though he writes in prose, uses words in the manner of a poet, particularly in the lyrical descriptions of the·way or the Taoist sage. In the broader sense of the word, his work is in fact one of the greatest poems of ancient China. For this reason it seems to me particularly important tc stick just as closely as possible to the precise wording and imagery of the Chinese. For example, in section 5 there is a passage in which Confu­ cius is pictured discw:sing the need to harmonize with and delight i'n all the manifold ups and downs of human existence, to "master them and never be at a loss for joy," adding that one should "make it be spring with everything." This last phrase, literally, "with things make spring," is an example of the highly poetic fanguage which Chuang Tzu employs in such passages. and for which he is justly admired. To render the phrase as "live in peace with mankind" (Giles), or "be kind with things" (Yu-Ian Fung), not only blurs the image of the original beyond recognition, but suggests that Chuang Tzu is mouthing cliches when in fact he is using·the Chinese lan­ guage as it has never been u5ed before. No other text of early times, with the possible exception of the Tso chuan, so fully exploits the beauties of ancient Chinese-its vigor, its econ­ omy, its richness and symmetry-and it is for this reason that [ have chosen to render the wording of the original as closely
as possible, even though the English which results may at times sound somewhat strange. Chuang Tzu uses words in unconventional ways and he deserves a translation that at least attempts to do justice to his imaginativeness. I have not hesitated to make free use of colloquialisms-a great part of the Chuang Tzu is in the form of informal dialogues-or of slang; I do so, however, not in order to create a "jazzy" effect, but because such words or constructions seem to me to get closer to the original than more formal English could. Wher­ ever I have substantially added to the wording of the original in translation, I have enclosed the added words in brackets. Needless to say, I could not render the literal meaning of the original until I had first decided what it was, and in this sense my translation is as much an interpretation, and as tentative
in many places, as any other. In the note on bibliography at
the end of this introduction, I have mentioned briefly the com­ mentaries and translations that l have drawn upon. But the result inevitably represents my own interpretation of the text, and will not be quite like that of anyone else. With a work of such difficulty, there can never be anything like a definitive translation, because there is no such thing as a definitive in­ terpretation. Every translator who takes up the text will pro­ duce his own Chuang T zu, and the more that are available for the reader to enjoy and compare, the better.
Much of the Chuang Tzu consists of anecdotes, often two or three anecdotes in a row that illustrate the same general theme and appear to be hardly more than different versions of a single story. In these anecdotes a variety of historical and semihistori­ cal personages appear, as well as a delightful assortment of gods, mythical heroes, and talking trees, birds, insects, and other creatures. One such historical figure, the logical philoso­ pher Hui Shih or Hui Tzu, who seems to have been a &iend
of Chuang Tzu, always represents the same viewpoint: that of "intellectuality as opposed to imagination," as Waley puts it (Three Ways of Thought, p. 12). But there is no consistency in the variety of viewpoints which the other figures are made to expound. Thus Confucius sometimes preaches conventional Confucian morality, while at other times he speaks in the words of a true Taoist sage, and even Chuang Tzu himself ap­ pears on occasion in the role of the convention-ridden fool. The reader must learn to expect any opinion whatsoever from any source, to savor the outrageous incongruities, and to judge for himself which of the opinions offered represents the highest level of enlightenment.
In closing, I may add a word on the translation of certain
key philosophical terms in the Chuang Tzu. The term Tao I have translated throughout as "the Way," in order to remain consistent with the practice adopted in the other translations in this series. It is perfectly true that Chuang Tzu means by this word something quite different from what Mo Tzu, Hsun Tzu, or Han Fei Tzu meant. But all of them used the same Chinese word, and the reader may easily judge for himself how they interpreted it by observing the ways in which they used it. For the same reason, I have rendered T'ien as "Heaven," or "heavenly" in nearly all cases. Chuang Tzu uses the word to mean Nature, what pertains to the natural as op­ posed to the artificial, or as a synonym for the Way. This too is very different from what Mo Tzu or Hsun Tzu meant by the word Tien, but again the reader may judge the differences for
himself. In nearly all cases I have rendered te as "virtue," ex­
cept where it has the special ?eaning of a favor or good deed done for someone. This word presents certain difficulties in Chuang Tzu. Sometimes he employs it to mean conventional virtue-that is, virtue in the Confucian or Mo-ist sense-in
which case it has bad connotations; at other times he employs it in a good sense to mean the true virtue or vital power that belongs to the man of Tao. (Compare Waley's rendering of the title Tao-te-c:hing as The Way and Its Power.) I prefer not to try to distinguish these two usages in the translation because I do not wish to impose upon the English a distinc­ tion that is not explicit in the original. As already mentioned, I render wu-wei as "inaction" and yu as "to wander" or "wan­ dering." In addition to inventing legendary figures with amus­ ing and often significant names, Chuang Tzu invents a variety of mysterious and high-sounding pseudo-technical terms to refer to the Way or the man who has made himself one with it. I have given a literal translation of such terms, and capitalized them in order to indicate their special charac­ ter--e.g., Great Clod, Supreme Swindle, True Man. The reader need not puzzle over their precise meaning, since in the end they all refer to essentially the same thing-the inexpres­ sible Absolute.

I have used as the basis of my translation the Chuang Tzu pu-cheng of Liu \Ven-tien (Shanghai, 1947), principally be­ cause of its magnificent legibility, though I have not always followed its punctuation. It would be impractical to list all the commentaries I have drawn upon, directly or indirectly; I have mentioned by name in my notes the commentator I am follow­ ing in questionable passages, and the reader may identify the works by consulting the exhaustive bibliography of Chuang Tzu commentaries in Kuan Feng's translation and study, Chuang Tzu nei-p'ien i-chieh ho p'i-p'an (Peking, 1961), pp. 370-403. Two works have been of particular assistanc? to me: one is the mvdern language Chinese translation by Kuan Feng cited above; the other is the Japanese translation by Fukunaga
Mitsuji, Soshi (Tokyo, 1956), in the Chugoku kotensen series. Both translations are confined to the "inner chapters," the first seven sections of the text; but they draw upon all the impor­ tant recent studies and contain invaluable notes and explana­ tions. No such exhaustive study has as yet been given to the remainder of the Chuang Tw text, and the latter sections of the work contain many unsolved problems. Three important works on the philosophy of Chuang Tzu may be noted here: the Chuang Tzu hsueh-an by Lang Ch'ing-hsiao (Shanghai,
1934; reprinted, Hong Kong, 1963); the Chuang Tzu che­ hsueh t'ao-lun chi (Peking, 1962), a collection of essays by Feng Yu-Ian, Kuan Feng, and other Chuang Tzu experts; and Soshi (Tokyo, 1964) by Fukunaga Mitsuji, a study of Chuang Tzu's thought. Also of aid to the student and translator of Chuang Tzu is the Concordance to Chuang T w, Harvard­
Yenching Institute Sinological Index Series, Supplement No.
20 (1947).
I have consulted several earlier English translations: that by Herbert A. Giles, Chuang Tw: Mystic, Moralist, and Social Reformer (London, 1889); that by James Legge in The Sacred Books of the Eas?, vols. XXXIX-XL; that by Yu-Ian Fung (Feng Yu-Ian), Chuang Tzu (Shanghai, 1933); and the ex­ cerpts translated by Arthur Waley in Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China (London, 1939), and by Lin Yutang in The Wisdom of Laotse (Modern Library, 1948). The first two are complete translations of the Chuang Tzu; the third is a transla­ tion of the "inner chapters"; while the last two contain excerpts
from many different sections. Another complete English trans­ lation, by James R. Ware, The Sayings of Chuang Chou (New York, New American Library [Mentor] 1963), did not come into my hands until after I had completed my version.
Giles, who produced the first complete English translation,
is very free in his rendering, and again and again substitutes what strike me as tiresome Victorian cliches for the complex and beautiful language of the original. In spite of his offen­ sively "literary" tone, hmvever, he generally gets at what ap­ pears to me to be the real meaning of the text. Legge is far more painstaking in reproducing the literal meaning, and for the most part uses a simple, unaffected English that can still be read with pleasure today. But, perhaps because of his long years of work on the Confucian texts, he seems to miss Chuang Tzu's point rather often, and to labor to make com­ mon sense out of paradox and fantasy. Yu-Ian Fung's work is valuable today mainly because it contains translations from the important Kuo Hsiang commentary. Lin Yutang's The Wisdom of Laotse contains a great many well-translated anec­ dotes and isolated passages from the Chuang Tzu, but they have been chopped up and completely rearranged to serve as a commentary on the T ao-te-ching, making it very difficult to appreciate the form and relationship which they have in the original. To my mind, by far the most readable and reliable of all Chuang Tzu translations to date are those by Arthur Waley, though unfortunately they represent only a fraction of the text as a whole. I have not had time to examine Profes­
sor Ware's translation carefully, though I note that, in his in­
troduction, he describes Chuang Tzu as a member of the "pro­ gressive, dynamic wing of Confucianism," which is rather like describing Lucretius as a member of the progressive wing of Stoicism. This strikes me as a flight of fancy that would have astounded even Chuang Tzu, and it is to be hoped that Profes­ sor Ware will sometime in the future explain to the world the reasoning upon which it is based.
?? .,!

FREE AND	EASY WANDERING
(SECTION  l)


In the northern darkness there is a fish and his name is K'un.1 The K'un is so huge I don't know how many thousand li he measures. He changes and becomes a bird whose name is P'eng. The back of the P'eng measures I don't know how
many thousand li across and, when he rises up and Hies off, his wings are like clouds all over the sky. When the sea begins to move,2 this bird sets off for the southern darkness, which is the Lake of Heaven.
The Universal Harmon-/ records various wonders, and it says: "When the P'eng journeys to the southern darkness, the waters are roiled for three thousand li. He beats the whirl­ wind and rises ninety thousand li, setting off on the sixth­ month gale." Wavering heat, bits of dust, living things blown about by the wind-the sky looks very blue. Is that its real color, or is it because it is so far away and has no end? When the bird looks down, all he sees is blue too.
If water is not piled up deep enough, it won't have the
strength to bear up a big boat. Pour a cup of water into a hol­ low in the Boor and bits of trash will sail on it like boats. But set the cup there and it will stick fast, for the water is too
1 K'un means fish roe. So Chuang Tzu begins with a paradox-the tiniest fish imaginable is also the largest fish imaginable.
Probably a reference to some seasonal shift in the tides or currents.
Identified variously as the name of a man or the name of a book. Prob­ ably Chuang Tzu intended it as the latter, and is poking fun at the philoso­ phers of other schools who cite ancient texts to prove their assertions.
shallow and the boat too large. If wind is not piled up deep enough, it won't have the strength to bear up great wings. Therefore when the P'eng rises ninety thousand Ii, he must have the wind under him like that. Only then can he mount on the back of the wind, shoulder the blue sky, and nothing can hinder or block him. Only then can he set his eyes to the south.
The cicada and the little dove laugh at this, saying, "When we make an effort and fly up, we can get as far as the elm or the sapanwood tree, but sometimes we don't make it and just fall down on the ground. Now how is anyone going to go ninety thousand li to the south!"
If you go off to the green woods nearby, you can take along food for three meals and come back with your stomach as full as ever. If you are going a hundred Ii, you must grind your grain the night before; and if you are going a thousand li, you must start getting the provisions together three months in advance. What do these two creatures understand? Little understanding cannot come up to great understanding; the short-lived cannot come up to the long-lived.
How do I know this is so? The morning mushroom knows nothing of twilight and dawn; the summer cicada knows noth­ ing of spring and autumn. They are the short-lived. South of Ch'u there is a caterpillar which counts five hundred years as one spring and five hundred years as one autumn. Long, long ago there was a great rose of Sharon that counted eight thou­ sand years as one spring and eight thousand years as one au• tumn. They are the long-lived. Yet P'eng-tsu4 alone is famous today for having lived a long time, and everybody tries to ape him. Isn't it pitiful!
Among the questions of T'ang to Ch'i we find the same
Said to have lived to an incredible old age. See below, p. 78, no. 12.
thing.5 In the bald and barren north, there is a dark sea, the Lake of Heaven. In it is a fish which is se,·eral thousand li across, and no one knows how long. His name is K'un. There is also a bird there, named P'eng, with a back like Mount T'ai and wings like clouds filling the sky. He beats the whirlwind, leaps into the air, and rises up ninety thousand Ii, cutting through the clouds and mist, shouldering the blue sky, and then he turns his eyes south and prepares to journey to the southern darkness.
The little quail laughs at him, saying, 'Where does he think he's going? I give a great leap and Ry up, but I never get more than ten or twelve yards before I come down Buttering among the weeds and brambles. And that's the best kind of
flying anyway! Where does he think he's going?" Such is the difference between big and little.
Therefore a man who has wisdom enough to fill one office effectively, good conduct enough to impress one community, virtue enough to please one ruler, or talent enough to be called into service in one state, has the same kind of self-pride as these little creatures. Sung Jung-tzu? would certainly burst out laughing at such a man. The whole world could praise Sung Jung-tzu and it wouldn't make him exert himself; the whole world could condemn him and it wouldn't make him mope.
The text may be faulty at this point. The Pei-shan-lu, a work written around A.O. 800 by the monk Shen-ch'ing, contains the following passage, said by ll Tang commentator on the Pei-shan-lu to be found in the Chw.ng Tzu: "T'ang asked Ch'i, 'Do up, down, and the four directions have a limit?' Ch'i replied, 'Beyond their limitlessness there is still another linut· lessness.'" But whether this passage was in the original Chuang Tzu, or whether, if 1t was, it belongs at this point in the text, are questions that cannot be answered.
Referred to elsewhere in the literature of the period as Sung Chien or Sung K'eng. According to the last section of the Chuang Tzu, he taught a doctrine of social harmony, frugality, pacifism, and the rejection of con­ ventional standards of honor and disgrace.
He drew a clear line between the internal and the external, and recognized the boundaries of true glory and disgrace. But that was all. As far as the world went, he didn't fret and worry, but there was still ground he left unturned.
Lieh Tzu7 could ride the wind and go soaring around with cool and breezy skill, but after fifteen days he came back to earth. As far as the search for good fortune went, he didn't fret and worry. He escaped the trouble of walking, but he still had to depend on something to get around. If he had only mounted on the truth of Heaven and Earth, ridden the changes of the six breaths, and thus wandered through the boundless, then what would he have had to depend on?
Therefore I say, the Perfect Man has no self; the Holy Man has no merit; the Sage has no fame.8
Yao wanted to cede the empire to Hsii Yu. "When the sun and moon have already come out," he said, "it's a waste of light to go on burning the torches, isn't it? \Vhen the seasonal rains are falling, it's a waste of water to go on irrigating the fields. If you took the throne, the world would be well ordered. I go on occupying it, but all I can see are my failings. I beg to turn over the world to you."
Hsu Yu said, "You govern the world and the world is al­ ready well governed. Now if I take your place, will I be doing it for a name? But name is only the guest of reality-will I be doing it so I can play the part of a guest? When the tailor­ bird builds her nest in the deep wood, she uses no more than one branch. When the mole drinks at the river, he takes no more than a bellyful. Go home and forget the matter, my lord.
'Lieh Yii-k'ou, a Taoist philosopher frequently mentioned in the Chuang Tzu. The Lieh Tzu, a work attributed to him, is of uncertain date and did not reach its present form until the 3d or 4th centuries A.D.
Not three different categories but three names for the same thing.
I have no use for the rulership of the world! Though the cool· may not run his kitchen properly, the priest and the imper­ sonator of the dead at the sacrifice do not leap over the wine casks and sacrificial stands and go take his place." 9

Chien vVu said to Lien Shu, "I was listening to Chieh Yii's talk-big and nothing to back it up, going on and on without turning around. I was completely dumfounded at his words­ no more end than the Milky Way, wild and wide of the mark, never coming near human affairs!"
"What were his words like?" asked Lien Shu.
"He said that there is a Holy Man living on faraway Ku-she Mountain, with skin like ice or snow, and gentle and shy like a young girl. He doesn't eat the five grains, but sucks the wind, drinks the dew, climbs up on the clouds and mist, rides a flying dragon, and wanders beyond the four seas. By con­ centrating his spirit, he can protect creatures from sickness and plague and make the harvest plentiful. I thought this was all insane and refused to believe it."
"You would!" said Lien Shu. "We can't expect a blind man to appreciate beautiful patterns or a deaf man to listen to bells and drums. And blindness and deafness are not confined to the body alone-the understanding has them too, as your words just now have shown. This man, with this virtue of his, is about to embrace the ten thousand things and roll them into one. Though the age calls for reform, why should he wear himself out over the affairs of the world? There is nothing that can harm this man. Though flood waters pile up to the sky, he will not drown. Though a great drought melts metal and
Or, following another interpretation, "the priest and the impersonator of the dead do not snatch his wine casks and chopping board away from him and take his place."
stone and scorches the earth and hills, he will not be burned. From his dust and leavings alone you could mold a Yao or a Shun! Why should he consent to bother about mere things?"

A man of Sung who sold ceremonial hats made a trip to Yueh, but the Yueh people cut their hair short and tattoo their bodies and had no use for such things. Yao brought order to the people of the world and directed the government of all within the seas. But he went to see the Four Masters of the far away Ku-she Mountain, [and when he got home] north of the Fen River, he was dazed and had forgotten his kingdom there.

Hui Tzu10 said to Chuang Tzu, "The king of Wei gave me some seeds of a huge gourd. I planted them, and when they grew up, the fruit was big enough to hold five piculs. I tried using it for a water container, but it was so heavy I couldn't lift it. I split it in half to make dippers, but they were so large and unwieldy that I couldn't dip them into anything. It's not that the gourds weren't fantastically big-but I decided they were no use and so I smashed them to pieces."
Chuang Tzu said, "You certainly are dense when it comes to using big things! In Sung there was a man who was skilled at making a salve to prevent chapped hands, and generation after generation his family made a living by bleaching silk in water. A traveler heard about the salve and offered to buy the prescription for a hundred measures of gold. The man called everyone to a family council. 'For generations we'\'e been bleaching silk and we've never made more than a few meas­ ures of gold,' he said. 'Now, if we sell our secret, we can make
•• The logician Hui Shih who, as pointed out by \Valey, in the Chuang
Tzu "stands for intellectuality as oppo6ed to imagination."
a hundred measures in one morning. Let's let him have it!' The traveler got the salve and introduced it to the king of Wu, who was having trouble with the state of Yueh. The king put the man in charge of his troops, and that winter they fought a naval battle with the men of Yiieh and gave them a bad beating.11 A portion of the conquered territory was awarded to the man as a fief. The salve had the power to prevent chapped hands in either case; but one man used it to get a fief, while the other one never got beyond silk bleaching-because they used it in different ways. Now you had a gourd big enough to hold five piculs. Why didn't you think of making it into a great tub so you could go floating around the rivers and lakes, instead of worrying because it was too big and unwieldy to dip into things! Obviously you still have a lot of underbrush in your head!"

Hui Tzu said to Chuang Tzu, "I have a big tree called a shu. Its trunk is too gnarled and bumpy to apply a meas­ uring line to, its branches too bent and twisty to match up to a compass or square. You could stand it by the road and no carpenter would look at it twice. Your words, too, are big and useless, and so everyone alike spurns them!"
Chuang Tzu said, "Maybe you've never seen a wildcat or a weasel. It crouches down and hides, watching for something to come along. It leaps and races east and west, not hesitating to go high or low-until it falls into the trap and dies in the net. Then again there's the yak, big as a cloud covering the sky. It certainly knows how to be big, though it doesn't know how to catch rats. Now you have this big tree and you're dis-
u Because the salve, by preventing the soldiers' hands from chapping, made it easier for them to handle thm welll)Ons.
tressed because it's useless. Why don't you plant it in Not­ Even-Anything Village, or the field of Broad-and-Boundless, relax and do nothing by its side, or lie down for a free and easy sleep under it? Axes will never shorten its life, nothing can ever harm it. If there's no use for it, how can it come to grief or pain?"
?.'1 DISCUSSION ON MAKING
?	ALL THINGS EQUAL
(SECTION 2)




Tzu-ch'i of South Wall sat leaning on his armrest, staring up at the sky and breathing-vacant and far away, as though he'd lost his companion.1 Yen Ch'eng Tzu-yu, who was standing by his side in attendance, said, "What is this? Can you really make the body like a withered tree and the mind like dead ashes? The man leaning on the armrest now is not the one who leaned on it before!"
Tzu-ch'i said, "You do well to ask the question, Yen. Now I have lost myself. Do you understand that? You hear the piping of men, but you haven't heard the piping of earth. Or if you've heard the piping of earth, you haven't heard the piping of Heaven!"
Tzu-yu said, "May I venture to ask what this means?"
Tzu-ch'i said, "The Great Clod belches out breath and its name is wind. So long as it doesn't come forth, nothing hap­ pens. But when it does, then ten thousand hollows begin cry­ ing wildly. Can't you hear them, long drawn out? In the mountain forests that lash and sway, there are huge trees a hundred spans around with hollows and openings like noses, like mouths, like ears, like jugs, like cups, like mortars, like rifts, like ruts. They roar like waves, whistle like arrows,
screech, gasp, cry, wail, moan, and howl, those in the lead calling out yeee!, those behind calling out yuuu! In a gentle
1 The word "companion" is interpreted variously to mean his associates,
his wife, or his own body.
breeze they amwer faintly, but in a full gale the chorus is gigantic. And when the fierce wind has passed on, then all the hollows are empty again. Have you never seen the tossing and trembling that goes on?"
Tzu-yu said, "By the piping of earth, then, you mean simply [the sound of] these hollows, and by the piping of man [the sound of] flutes and whistles. But may I ask about the piping of Heaven?"
Tzu--ch'i said, "Blowing on the ten thousand things in a dif­ ferent way, so that each can be itself-all take what they want for themselves, but who does the sounding?"2
Great understanding is broad and unhurried; little under­ standing is cramped and busy. Great words are clear and lim­ pid;3 little words are shrill and quarrelsome. In sleep, men's spirits go visiting; in waking hours, their bodies hustle. With everything they meet they become entangled. Day after day they use their minds in strife, sometimes grandiose, sometimes sly, sometimes petty. Their little fears are mean and trembly; their great fears are stunned and overwhelming. They bound off like an 2rrow or a crossbow pellet, certain that they are the
arbiters of right and wrong. They cling to their position as though they had sworn before the gods, sure that they are hold­ ing on to victory. They fade like fall and winter-such is the way they dwindle day by day. They drown in what they do­ you cannot make them turn back. They grow dark, as though scaled with seals-such are the excesses of their old age. And when their minds draw near to death, nothing can restore them to the light.
Joy, anger, grief, delight, worry, regret, fickleness, in8ex-
1 Heaven is not something distinct from earth and man, but a name ap­
plied to the natural and spontaneous functioning of the two.
Reading Ian instead of yen.
ibility, modesty, willfulness, candor, insolence-music from empty holes, mushrooms springing ur in dampness, day and night replacing each other before us, and no one knows where they sprout from. Let it be! Let it be! [It is enough that] morn­ ing and evening we have them, and they are the means by which we live. \Vithout chem we would not exist; without us they would have nothing to take hold of. This comes close to the matter. But I do not know what makes them the way they are. It would seem as though they have some True Master, and yet I find no trace of him. He can act-that is certain. Yet I cannot see his form. He has identity but no form.
The hundred joints, the nine openings, the six organs, all come together and exist here [as my body]. But which part should I feel closest to? I should delight in all parts, you say? But there must be one I ought to favor more. If not, are they all of them mere servants? But if they are all servants, thc:fl how can they keep order among themselves? Or do they take turns being lord and servant? It would seem as though there
must be some True Lord among them. But whether I succeed in discovering his identity or not, it neither adds to nor detracts from his Truth.
Once a man receives this fixed bodily form, he holds on to it, waiting for the end. Sometimes clashing with things, some­ times bending before them, he runs his course like a galloping steed, and nothing can stop him. Is he not pathetic? Sweating and laboring to the end of his days and never seeing his ac­ complishment, utterly exhausting himself and never knowing where to look for rest-can you help pitying him? I'm not dead yet! he says, but what good is that? His body decays, his mind follows it-can you deny that this is a great sorrow? Man's life has always been a muddle like chis. How could I be the only muddled one, and other men not muddled?
If a man follows the mind given him and makes it his teacher, then who can be without a teacher? Why must you comprehend the process of change and form your mind on that basis before you can have a teacher? Even an idiot has his teacher. But to fail to abide by this mind and still insist up0n your rights and wrongs-this is like saying that you set off for Yueh today and got there yesterday.4 This is to claim that what
doesn't exist exists. If you claim that what doesn't exist exists,
then even the holy sage Yu couldn't understand you, much less a person like me!
Words are not just wind. Words have something to say. But if what they have to say is not fixed, then do they really say something? Or do they say nothing? People suppose that words are different from the peeps of baby birds, but is there any difference, or isn't there? What does the Way rely upon,5 that we have true and false? What do words rely upon, that we have right and wrong? How can the Way go away and not exist? How can words exist and not be acceptable? When the Way relies on little accomplishments and words rely on vain show, then we have the rights and wrongs of the Confu­ cians and the Mo-ists. What one calls right the other calls wrong; what one calls wrong the other calls right. But if we want to right their wrongs and wrong their rights, then the best thing to use is clarity.
Everything has its "that," everything has its "this." From the point of view of "that" you cannot see it, but through un­ derstanding you can know it. So I say, "that" comes out of "this" and "this" depends on "that"-which is to say that
According to the last section of the Chuang Tzu, this was one of the paradoxes of the logician Hui Tzu.
Following the interpretation of Chang Ping-Jin. The older interpretation
of yin here and in the following sentences is, "What is the Way hidden
by," etc.
"this" and "that" give birth to each other. But where there is birth there must be death; where there is death there must be birth. \,Vhere there is acceptability there must be unacceptabil­ ity; where there is unacceptability there must be acceptability. Where there is recognition of right there must be recognition of wrong; where there is recognition of wrong there must be recognition of right. Therefore the sage does not proceed in such a way, but illuminates all in the light of Heaven.6 He too recognizes a "this," but a "this" which is also "that," a "that" which is also "this." His "that" has both a right and a wrong in it; his "this" too has both a right and a wrong in it. So, in fact, does he still have a "this" and "that"? Or does he in fact no longer have a "this" and "that"? A state in which "this" and "that" no longer find their opposites is called the hinge of the Way. When the hinge is fitted into the socket, it can respond endlessly. Its right then is a single endlessness and its wrong too is a single endlessness. So I say, the best thing to use is clarity.
To use an attribute to show that attributes are not attributes is not as good as using a nonattribute to show that attributes are not attributes. To use a horse to show that a horse is not a horse is not as good as using a non-horse to show that a horse is not a horse,7 Heaven and earth are one attribute; the ten thousand things are one horse.
What is acceptable we call acceptable; what is unacceptable we call unacceptable. A road is made by people walking on it; things are so because they are called so. What makes them so? Making them so makes them so. What makes them not so?
T'ien, which for Chuang Tzu means Nature or the Way.
A reference to the statements of the logician Kung-sun Lung, "A white horse is not a horse" and "Attributes are not attributes in and of them­ Klves."
Making them not so makes them not so. Things all must have that which is so; things all must have that which is acceptable. There is nothing that is not so, nothing that is not acceptable. For this reason, whether you point to a little stalk or a great pillar, a leper or the beautiful Hsi-shih, things ribald and shady or things grotesque and strange, the Way makes them all into one. Their dividedness is their completeness; their complete­ ness is their impairment. No thing is either complete or im­ paired, but all are made into one again. Only the man of far­ reaching vision knows how to make them into one. So he has no use [for categories], but relegates all to the constant. The constant is the useful; the useful is the passable; the passable is the successful; and with success, all is accomplished. He re­ lies upon this alone, relies upon it and does not know he is
doing so. This is called the Way.
But to wear out your brain trying to make things into one without realizing that they are all the same-this is called "three in the morning." What do I mean by "three in the morning"? When the monkey trainer was handing out acorns, he said, "You get three in the morning and four at night." This made all the monkeys furious. "Well, then," he said, "you get four in the morning and three at night." The mon­ keys were all delighted. There was no change in the reality behind the words, and yet the monkeys responded with joy and anger. Let them, if they want to. So the sage harmonizes with both right and wrong and rests in Heaven the Equalizer. This is called walking two roads.
The understanding of the men of ancient times went a long
way. How far did it go? To the point where some of them be­ lieved that things have never existed-so far, to the end, where nothing can be added. Those at the next stage thought that
things exist but recognized no boundaries among them. Those at the next stage thought there were boundaries but recognized no right and wrong. Becawse right and wrong appeared, the Way was injured, and because the \Vay was injured, love be­ came complete. But do such things as completion and injury really exist, or do they not?
There is such a thing as completion and injury-Mr. Chao playing the lute is an example. There is such a thing as no completion and no injury-Mr. Chao not playing the lute is an example.8 Chao Wen played the lute; Music Master K'uang waved his baton; Hui Tzu leaned on his <lesk. The knowledge of these three was close to perfection. All were masters, and therefore their names have been handed down to later ages. Only in their likes they were different from him [the true sage]. 'What they liked, they tried to make clear.
\Vhat he is not clear about, they tried to make clear, and so they ended in the foolishness of "hard" and "white." 9 Their sons, too, devoted all their lives to their fathers' 10 theories, but till their death never reached any completion. Can these men
be said to have attained completion? If so, then so have all the
rest of us. Or can they not be said to have attained completion? If so, then neither we nor anything else have ever attained it. The torch of chaos and doubt-this is what the sage steers
Chao Wen was a famous lute (ch'in) player. But the best music he could play (i.e., complete) was only a pale and partial reflection of the ideal music, which "''as thereby injured and impaired, just as the unity of the Way was injured by the appearance of lo\·e--i.e., man's likes and dis­ likes. Hence, when Mr. Chao refrained from playing the lute, there was neither completion nor injury.
The logicians Hui Tzu and Kung-sun Lung spent much time discussing the relationship between attributes such as "hard" and "white" and the thing to which they pertain.
1°Following Yu-Ian Fung and Fukunaga, I read fu instead of wen.
by.11 So he does not use things but relegates all to the constant. This is what it means to use clarity.

Now I am going to make a statement here. I don't know whether it fits into the category of other people's statements or not. But whether it fits into their category or whether it doesn't, it obviously fits into some category. So in that respect it is no different from their statements. However, let me try making my statement.
There is a beginning. There is a not yet beginning to he a
beginning. There is a not yet beginning to be a not yet begin­ ning to be a beginning. There is being. There is nonbeing. There is a not yet beginning to be nonbeing. There is a not yet beginning to be a not yet beginning to be nonbeing. Sud­ denly there is being and nonbeing. But between this being and nonbeing, I don't really know which is being and which is nonbeing. Now I have just said something. But I don't know whether what I have said has really said something or whether it hasn't said something.
There is nothing in the world bigger than the tip of an autumn hair, and Mount Tai is little. No one has lived longer than a dead child, and P'eng-tsu died young.12 Heaven and earth were born at the same time I was, and the ten thousand things are one with me.
We have already become one, so how can I say anything? But I have just said that we are one, so how can I not be saying
11 He accepts things as they are, though to the ordinary person attempting to establish values they appear chaotic and doubtful and in need of clari6ca­
tiODI.
u The strands of animal fur were believed to grow particularly fine in autumn: hence "the tip of an autumn hair" is a cliche for something ex­ tremely tiny. P'eng-tsu, the Chinese Methuselah, has already appeared OD
p. 24 above.
something? The one and what I said about it make two, and two and the original one make three. If we go on this way, then even the cleverest mathematician can't tell where we'll end, much less an ordinary man. If by moving from nonbeing to being we get to three, how far will we get if we move from being to being? Better not to move, but to let things be!
The Way has never known boundaries; speech has no con­ stancy. But because of (the recognition of a] "this," there came to be boundaries. Let me tell you what the boundaries are. There is left, there is right, there are theories, there are de­ bates,13 there are divisions, there are discriminations, there are emulations, and there are contentions. These are called the Eight Virtues.14 As to what is beyond the Six Realms, 15 the sage admits it exists but does not theorize. As to what is within the Six Realms, he theorizes but does not debate. In the case of the Spring and Autumn,16 the record of the former kings of past ages, the sage debates but does not discriminate. So [I say,] those who divide fail to divide; those who discrimi­ nate fail to discriminate. What does this mean, you ask? The sage embraces things. Ordinary men discriminate among them and parade their discriminations before others. So I say, those who discriminate fail to see.
The Great Way is not named; Great Discriminations are not spoken; Great Benevolence is not benevolent; Great Modesty
,. Following the reading in the Ts'ui text.
"Many commentators and translators try to give the word te some special meaning other than its ordinary one of "virtue" in this context. But I be­ lieve Chuang Tr.u is deliberately parodying the ethical categories of the Confucians and Mo-ists.
•• Heaven, earth, and the four directions, i.e., the universe.
11 Perhaps a reference to the Spring and Autumn Annals, a history of the state of Lu said to have been compiled by Confucius. But it may be a generic term referring to the chronicles of the various feudal states.
is not humble; Great Daring does not attack. If the Way is made clear, it is not the Way. If discriminations are put into words, they do not suffice. If benevolence has a constant ob­ ject, it cannot be universal.17 If mcxlesty is fastidious, it cannot be trusted. If daring attacks, it cannot be complete. These five are all round, but they tend toward the square.18
Therefore understanding that rests in what it does not un­ derstand is the finest. Who can understand discriminations that are not spoken, the Way that is not a way? If he can understand this, he may be called the Reservoir of Heaven. Pour into it and it is never full, dip from it and it never runs dry, and yet it does not know where the supply comes from. This is called the Shaded Light.19
So it is that long ago Yao said to Shun, "I want to attack the rulers of Tsung, K'uai, and Hsii-ao. Even ?s I sit on my throne, this thought nags at me. Why is this?"
Shun replied, "These three rulers are only little dwellers in the weeds and brush. Why this nagging desire? Long ago, ten suns came out all at once and the ten thousand things were all lighted up. And how much greater is virtue than these suns!" 20
Nieh Ch'ueh asked Wang Ni, "Do you know what all things agree in calling right?"
"How would I know that?" said Wang Ni.
"Do you know that you don't know it?" "How would I know that?"
"Then do things know nothing?"
"Reading chou instead of ch'eng.
"'All are originally perfect, but may become "squarf'd," i.e., impaired, by
the misuses mentioned.
u Or, according to another interpretation, "the Precious Light.''
Here virtue is to be understood in a good sense, as the power of the Way.
Discussion on Making All Things Equal	41
"How would I know that? However, suppose I try saying something. What way do I have of knowing that if I say I know something I don't really not know it? Or what way do 1 have of knowing that if I say I don't know something I don't really in fact know it? Now let me ask you some questions. If a man sleeps in a damp place, his back aches and he ends up half paralyzed, but is this true of a loach? If he lives in a tree, he is terrified and shakes with fright, but is this true of a monkey? Of these three creatures, then, which one knows the proper place to live? Men eat the Resh of grass-fed and grain­ fed animals, deer eat grass, centipedes find snakes tasty, and
hawks and falcons relish mice. Of these four, which knows how food ought to taste? Monkeys pair with monkeys, deer go out with deer, and fish play around with fish. Men claim th2t Mao-ch'iang and Lady Li were beautiful, but if fish saw them they would dive to the bottom of the stream, if birds saw them they would Ry away, and if deer saw them they would break into a run. Of these four, which knows how to fix the standard of beauty for the world? The way I see it, the rules of benevolence and righteousness and the paths of right and wrong are all hopelessly snarled and jumbled. How could I know anything about such discriminations?"
Nieh Ch'iieh said, "If you don't know what is profitable or
harmful, then does the Perfect Man likewise know nothing of such things?"
Wang Ni replied, "The Perfect Man is godlike. Though the great swamps blaze, they cannot burn him; though the great rivers freeze, they cannot chill him; though swift lightning splits the hills and howling gales shake the sea, they cannot frighten him. A man like this rides the clouds and mist, strad­ dles the sun and moon, and wanders beyond the four seas.
Even life and death have no effect on him, much less the rules of profit and loss!"

Chi.i Ch'i.ich-tzu said to Chang Wu-tzu, "I have heard Con· fucius say that the sage does not work at anything, does not pursue profit, does not dodge harm, does not enjoy being sought after, does not follow the Way, says nothing yet say? something, says something yet says nothing, and wanders be­ yond the dust and grime. Confucius himself regarded these as wild and flippant words, though I believe they describe the working of the mysterious Way. What do you think of them?" Chang Wu-tzu said, "Even the Yellow Emperor would be confused if he heard such words, so how could you expect Confucius to understand them? What's more, you're too hasty in your own appraisal. You see an egg and demand a crowing cock, see a crossbow pellet and demand a roa,;t dove. I'm going to try speaking some reckless words and I want you to listen to them recklessly. How will that be? The sage leans on the sun and moon, tucks the universe under his arm, merges him­ self with things, leaves the confusion and muddle as it is, and looks on slaves as exalted. Ordinary men strain and struggle; the sage is stupid and blackish. He takes part in ten thousand ages and achieves simplicity in oneness. For him, all the ten thousand things are what they are, and thus they enfold each
other.
"How do I know that loving life is not a delusion? How do I know that in hating death I am not like a man who, having left home in his youth, has forgotten the way back?
"Lady Li was the daughter of the border guard of Ai.21
When she was first taken captive and brought to the state of
"'She was taken captive by Duke Hsien of Chin in 671 u.c., and later became his consort.
Chin, she wept until her tears drenched the collar of her robe. But later, when she went to live in the palace of the ruler, shared his couch with him, and ate the delicious meats of his table, she wondered why she had ever wept. How do I know that the dead do not wonder why they ever longed for life? "He who dreams of drinking wine may weep when morning comes; he who dreams of weeping may in the morning go off to hunt. While he is dreaming he does not know it is a dream, and in his dream he may even try to interpret a dream. Only after he wakes does he know it was a dream. And someday there will be a great awakening when we know that this is all a great dream. Yet the stupid believe they are awake, busily ane brightly assuming they understand things, calling this man ruler, that one herdsman-how dense! Confucius and you are both dreaming! And when I say you are dreaming, I am dreaming, too. Words like these will be labeled the Supreme Swindle. Yet, after ten thousand generations, a great sage may appear who will know their meaning, and it will still be as
though he appeared with astonishing speed.
"Suppose you and I have had an argument. If you have beaten me instead of my beating you, then are you necessarily right and am I necessarily wrong? If I have beaten you instead of your beating me, then am I necessarily right and are you necessarily wrong? Is one of us right and the other wrong? Are both of us right or are both of us wrong? If you and I don't know the answer, then other people are bound to be even more in the dark. Whom shall we get to decide what is right? Shall
we get someone who agrees with you to decide? But if he al­ ready agrees with you, how can he decide fairly? Shall we get someone who agrees with me? But if he already agrees with me, how can he decide? Shall we get someone who disagrees with both of us? But if he already disagrees with both of us,
44	Chuang Tzu
how can he decide? Shall we get someone who agrees with both of us? But if he already agrees with both of us, how can he decide? Obviously, then, neither you nor I nor anyone else can know the answer. Shall we wait for still another person? "But waiting for one shifting voice [to pass judgment on) another is the same as waiting for none of them.22 Harmonize them all with the Heavenly Equality, leave them to their end­ less changes, and so live out your years. What do I mean by harmonizing them with the Heavenly Equality? Right is not
right; so is not so. If right were really right, it would differ so
clearly from not right that there would be no need for argu­ ment. If so were really so, it would differ so clearly from not so that there would be no need for argument. Forget the years; forget distinctions. Leap into the boundless and make it your home!"

Penumbra said to Shadow, "A little while ago you were walking and now you're standing still; a little while ago you were sitting and now you're standing up. Why this lack of independent action?"
Shadow said, "Do I have to wait for something before I can be like this? Does what I wait for also have to wait for some­ thing before it can be like this? Am I waiting for the scales of a snake or the wings of a cicada? How do I know why it is so? How do I know why it isn't so?" 23
""I follow the rearrangement of the text suggested by Lu Hui-ch'ing. But the text of this whole paragraph leaves much to be desired and the translation is tentative.
10 That is, to ordinary men the shadow appears to depend upon something ehe for its movement, just as the snake depends on its scales (according to Chinese belief) and the cicada on its wings. But do such causal views of action really have any meaning?
Once Chuang Chou dreamt he was a butterfly, a butterfly flitting and fluttering around, happy with himself and doing as he pleased. He didn't know he was Chuang Chou. Sud­ denly he woke up and there he was, solid and unmistakable Chuang Chou. But he didn't know if he was Chuang Chou who had dreamt he was a butterfly, or a butterHy dreaming he was Chuang Chou. Between Chuang Chou and a butterfly there must be some distinction! This is called the T ransfonna­ tion of Things.
?.'1 THE SECRET OF CARING
h	FOR LIFE1
(SECTION 3)



Your life has a limit but knowledge has none. If you use what is limited to pursue what has no limit, you will be in danger. If you understand this and still strive for knowledge, you will be in danger for certain! If you do good, stay away from fame. If you do evil, stay away from punishments. Follow the mid­ dle; go by what is constant, and you can stay in one piece, keep yourself alive, look after your parents, and live out your years.
Cook Ting was cutting up an ox for Lord Wen-hui.2 At every touch of his hand, every heave of his shoulder, every move of his feet, every thrust of his knee-zip! zoop! He slithered the knife along with a zing, and all was in perfect rhythm, as though he were performing the dance of the Mul­ berry Grove or keeping time to the Ching-shou music.3
"Ah, this is marvelous!" said Lord Wen-hui. "Imagine skill reaching such heights!"
Cook Ting laid down his knife and replied, 'What I care about is the Way, which goes beyond skill. When I first began cutting up oxen, all I could see was the ox itself. After three years I no longer saw the whole ox. And now-now I go at it by spirit and don't look with my eyes. Perception and under-
1 The chapter is very brief and would appear to be mutilated.
Identified as King Hui of Wei, who has already appeared on p. 2.8 above.
The Mulberry Grove is identified as a rain dance from the time of King T'ang of the Shang dynasty, and the Ching-shou music as part of a longer composition from the time of Yao.
The Secret of Caring for Life    47
standing have come to a stop and spirit moves where it wants. I go along with the natural makeup, strike in the big hollows, guide the knife through the big openings, and follow things as they are. So I never touch the smallest ligament or tendon, much less a main joint.
"A good cook changes his knife once a year-because he
cuts. A mediocre cook changes his knife once a month-be­ cause he hacks. I've had this knife of mine for nineteen years and I've cut up thousands of oxen with it, and yet the blade is as good as though it had just come from the grindstone. There are spaces between the joints, and the blade of the knife has really no thickness. If you insert what has no thickness into such spaces, then there's plenty of room-more than enough for the blade to play about in. That's why after nine­ teen years the blade of my knife is still as good as when it first came from the grindstone.
"However, whenever I come to a complicated place, I size up the difficulties, tell myself to watch out and be careful, keep my eyes on what I'm doing, work very slowly, and move the knife with the greatest subtlety, until-Bop! the whole thing comes apart like a clod of earth crumbling to the ground. I stand there holding the knife and look all around me, com­ pletely satisfied and reluctant to move on, and then I wipe off the knife and put it away."•
"Excellent!" said Lord Wen-hui. "I have heard the words of Cook Ting and learned how to care for life!"
Waley (Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China, p. 73) takes this whole paragraph to refer to the working methods of a mediocre carver, and hence translates it very differently. There is a great deal to be said for his interpretation, but after much consideration I have decided to follow the traditional interpretation because it seems to me that the extreme care and C'-!ution which the cook uses when he comes to a difficult place is also a part
of Chuang Tzu's "secret of caring for life."
48	Cliuang Tzu
When Kung-wen Hsi.ian saw the Commander of the Right/ he was startled and said, "What kind of man is this? How did he come to lose his foot? Was it Heaven? Or was it man?"
"It was Heaven, not man," said the commander. "When
Heaven gave me life, it saw to it that I would be one-footed. Men's looks are given to them. So I know this was the work of Heaven and not of man. The swamp pheasant has to walk ten paces for one peck and a hundred paces for one drink, but it doesn't want to be kept in a cage. Though you treat it like a king, its spirit won't be content."

When Lao T an6 died, Ch'in Shih went to mourn for him; but after giving three cries, he left the room.
"\,Veren't you a friend of the Master?" asked Lao Tzu's dis- ciples.
''Yes."
"And you think it's all right to mourn him this way?" "Yes," said Ch'in Shih. "At first I took him for a real man,
but now I know he wasn't. A little while ago, when I went in to mourn, I found old men weeping for him as though they were weeping for a son, and young men weeping for him as though they were weeping for a mother. To have gathered a group like that, he must have done something to make them talk about him, though he didn't ask them to talk, or make them weep for him, though he didn't ask them to weep. This
is to hide from Heaven, turn your back on the true state of affairs, and forget what you were born with. In the old days, this was called the crime of hiding from Heaven. Your master
Probably the ex-Commander of the Right, as he has been punished by having one foot amputated, a common penalty in ancie.it China. It is mu­ tilating punishments such as these which Chuang Tzu has in mind when he talks about the need to "stay in one piece."
Lao Tzu, the reputed author of the Tao-te-ching.
