	?   FIT  FOR EMPERORS AND KINGS (SECTION  7)




	Nieh Ch'iieh was questioning \Vang Ni. Fouc times he asked a question and
four times Wang Ni said he didn't know. Nieh Ch'i.ieh proceeded to hop around
in great glee and went and told Master P'u-i. Master P'u-i said, "Are you
just now finding that out? 1 The clansman Yu-yii was no match for the clans­
man T'ai.2 The clansman Yu-yi.i still held on to benevolence and worked to
win men over. He won men over all right, but he never got out into [the realm
of] 'not-man.' The clansman Tai, now-he lay down peaceful and easy; he woke
up wide­ eyed and blank. Sometimes he thought he was a horse; some­ times he
thought he was a cow. His understanding was truly trustworthy; his virtue was
perfectly true. He never entered [the realm of] 'not-man.' " 3

	Chien vVu went to see the madman Chieh Yii. Chieh Yii 1 On Nieh Ch'iieh
and Wang Ni, see above, pp. 40-42. Master P'u-i is probably the same as
Master P'i-i, who appears elsewhere in the Chuang Tm as the teacher of Wang
Ni. According to commentators, Nieh Ch'iieh's delight came from the fact that
he had finally realized that there are no answers to questions. "The clansman
Yu-yii" is the sage ruler Shun, the ideal of the C.Onfu­ cian philosophers.
"The clansman T'ai" is vaguely identified as a ruler of high antiquity. The
existence of a category "not-man" depends upon the recognition of a category
"man." Shun could get no further than the category "man"; hence he never
reached the realm of "not-man." T'ai, on the other hand, was able to
transcend all such categories. said, "What was Chung Shih telling you the
other day?"' Chien Wu said, "He told me that the ruler of men should devise
his own principles, standards, ceremonies, and regula­ tions, and then there
will be no one who will fail to obey him and be transformed by them." The
madman Chieh Yu said, "This is bogus virtue! To try to govern the world like
this is like trying to walk the ocean, to drill through a river, or to make a
mosquito shoulder a mountain! When the sage governs, does he govern what is
on the outside? He makes sure of himself first, and then he acts. He makes
absolutely certain that things can do what they are supposed to do, that is
all. The bird flies high in the sky where it can escape the danger of
stringed arrows. The field mouse burrows deep down under the sacred hill
where it won't have to worry about men digging and smoking it out. Have you
got less sense than these two little creatures?"

	T'ien Ken was wandering on the sunny side of Yin ]\foun­ tain. When he
reached the banks of the Liao River, he hap­ pened to meet a Nameless Man. He
questioned the man, say­ ing, "Please may I ask how to rule the world?" The
Nameless Man said, "Get away from me, you peasant! What kind of a dreary
question is that! I'm just about to set off with the Creator. And if I get
bored with that, then I'll ride on the Light-and-Lissome Bird out beyond the
six direc­ tions, wandering in the village of Not-Even-Anything and living in
the Broad-and-Borderless field. What business5 do 'Chien Wu and Chieh Yii
have already appeared above, on p. 27. Noth­ ing is known of Chung Shih. I
follow Yii Yueh in taking jih to mean "the other day." you have coming with
this talk of governing the world and disturbing my mind?" But Tien Ken
repeated his question. The Nameless Man said, "Let your mind wander in
simplicity, blend your spirit with the vastness, follow along with things the
way they are, and make no room for personal views-then the world will be
governed."

	Yang-tzu Chi.i6 went to see Lao Tan and said, "Here is a man swift as an
echo, strong as a beam, with a wonderfully clear understailding of the
principles of things, studying the Way without ever letting up-a man like
this could compare with an enlightened king, couldn't he?" Lao Tan said, "In
comparison to the sage, a man like this is a drudging slave, a craftsman
bound to his calling, wearing out his body, grieving his mind. They say it is
the beautiful markings of the tiger and the ieopard that call out the
hunters, the nimbleness of the monkey and the ability of the dog to catch
rats7 that make them end up chained. A man like this -how could he compare to
an enlightened king?" Yang-tzu Chi.i, much taken aback, said, "May I venture
to ask about the government of the enlightened king?" Lao Tan said, "The
government of the enlightened king? His achievements blanket the world but
appear not to be his own doing. His transforming influence touches the ten
thou-

	I follow the traditional interpretation, though in fact no one has suc­
ceeded in determining the meaning of this character for certain. Other in­
terpretations are: "How do you have the leisure to come," etc., or "What is
this dream tallr that you come with about governing the world," etc. Perhaps
meant to be identified with the hedonist philosopher Yang Chu. Reading liu in
accordance with the parallel passage in Section 12, sand things but the
people do not depend on him. With him there is no promotion or praise-he lets
everything find its own enjoyment. He takes his stand on what cannot be
fathomed and wanders where there is nothing at all."

	In Cheng there was a shaman of the gods named Chi Hsien. He could tell
whether men would live or die, survive or perish, be fortunate or
unfortunate, live a long time or die young, and he would predict the year,
month, week,8 and day as though he were a god himself. When the people of
Cheng saw him, they dropped everything and ran out of his way. Lieh Tzu went
to see him and was completely intoxicated. Returning, he said to Hu Tzu,9 "I
used to think, Master, that your Way was perfect. But now I see there is
something even higher!" Hu Tzu said, "I have already showed you all the
outward forms, but I haven't yet showed you the substance-and do you really
think you have mastered this Way of mine? There may be a Sock of hens but, if
there is no rooster, how can they lay fertile eggs? You take what you know of
the Way and wave it in the face of the world, expecting to be believed! This
is the reason men can see right through you. Try bringing your shaman along
next time and letting him get a look at me." The next day Lieh Tzu brought
the shaman to see Hu Tzu. When they had left the room, the shaman said, 'Tm
so sorry -your master is dying! There's no life left in him-he won't last the
week. I saw something very strange-something like wet ashes!" Lieh Tzu went
back into the room, weeping and drenching The ancient ten-day week. The
Taoist philosopher Lieh Tzu has already appeared on p. 26 above. Hu Tzu is
his teacher. the collar of his robe with tears, and reported this to Hu Tzu.
Hu Tzu said, "Just now I appeared to him with the Pattern of Earth-still and
silent, nothing moving, nothing standing up. He probably saw in me the
vVorkings of Virtue Closed. 0[.10 Try bringing him around again." The next
day the two came to see Hu Tzu again, and when they had left the room, the
shaman said to Lieh T zu, "It cer­ tainly was lucky that your master met me!
He's going to get better-he has all the signs of life! I could see the
stirring of what had been closed off!" Lieh Tzu went in and reported this to
Hu Tzu. Hu Tzu said, "Just now I appeared to him as Heaven and Earth-no name
or substance to it, but still the workings, coming up from the heels. He
probably saw in me the Work­ ings of the Good One.11 Try bringing him again."
The next day the two came to see Hu Tzu again, and when they had left the
room, the shaman said to Lieh T zu, "Your master is never the same! I have no
way to physiognomize him! If he will try to steady himself, then I will come
and examine him again." Lieh Tzu went in and reported this to Hu Tzu. Hu Tzu
said, "Just now I appeared to him as the Great Vastness Where Nothing Wins
Out. He probably saw in me the vVorkings of the Balanced Breaths. Where the
swirling waves12 gather there is an abyss; where the still waters gather
there is an abyss; where the running waters gather there is an 10 Virtue here
has the sense of ,·ital force. Cf. Book of Changes, Hsi t:z:'u 2:  "The Great
Virtue of Heaven and Earth is called life." 11 The language of this whole
passage is, needless to say, deliberately mysterious. The term "Good One" may
have some relation to the passage in the Changes, Hsi t:z:'u 1: "The
succession of the yin and yang is called the Way. What carries it on is
goodness." "Following the emendation and interpretation of Ma Hsii-lun.
94	Ch1rnng Tzu abyss. The abyss has nine names and I have shown him
three.13 Try bringing him again." The next day the two came to see Hu Tzu
again, but before the shaman had even come to a halt before Hu Tzu, his wits
left him and he fled. "Run after him!" said Hu Tzu, but though Lieb Tzu ran
after him, he could not catch up. Returning, he reported to Hu Tzu, "He's
vanished! He's disappeared! I couldn't catch up with him." Hu Tzu said, "Just
now I appeared to him as Not Yet Emerged from l\1y Source. I came at him
empty, wriggling and turning, not knowing anything about 'who' or 'what,' now
dipping and bending, now Bowing in waves-that's why he ran away." After this,
Lich Tzu concludt>d that he had never really be­ gun to learn anything.14 He
went home and for three yeilrS did not go out. He replaced his wife at the
stove, fed the pigs as though he were feeding people, and showed no
preferences in the things he did. He got rid of the carving and polishing and
returned to plainness, letting his body stand alone like a clod. In the midst
of entanglement he remained sealed, and in this oneness he ended his life.

	Do not be an embodier of fame; do not be a storehouse of schemes; do not
be an undertaker of projects; do not be a proprietor of wisdom. Embody to the
fullest what has no end and wander where there is no trail. Hold on to all
that you have received from Heaven but do not think you have gotten 11
,	ing to commentators, the three forms of the abyss in the order given !,
. c correspond to the third, first, and second of Hu Tzu's mani· Eestations.
11 That is, he had re.ached the highest stage of understanding. anything. Be
empty, that is all. The Perfect Man uses his mind like a mirror-going after
nothing, welcoming nothing, re­ sponding but not storing. Therefore he can
win out over things and not hurt himself.

	The emperor of the South Sea was called Shu [Brief], the emperor of the
North Sea was called Hu [Sudden], and the emperor of the central region was
called Hun-tun [Chaos]. Shu and Hu from time to time came together for a
meeting in the territory of Hun-tun, and Hun-tun treated them very gen­
erously. Shu and Hu discussed how they could repay his kind­ ness. "All men,"
they said, "have seven openings so they can see, hear, eat, and breathe. But
Hun-tun alone doesn't have any. Let's trying boring him some!" Every day they
bored another hole, and on the seventh day Hun-tun died. ?   AUTUMN  FLOODS
(SECTION  17)



	Thetime of the autumn floods came and the hundred streams poured into the
Yellow River. Its racing current swelled to such proportions that, looking
from bank to bank or island to island, it was impossible to distinguish a
horse from a cow. Then the Lord of the River1 was beside himself with joy,
be­ lieving that all the beauty in the world belonged to him alone. Following
the current, he journeyed east until at last he reached the North Sea.
Looking east, he could see no end to the water. The Lord of the River began
to wag his head and roll his eyes. Peering far off in the direction of Jo,2
he sighed and said, "The common saying has it, 'He has heard the Way a mere
hundred times but he thinks he's better than anyone else.' It applies to me.
In the past, I heard men belittling the learning of Confucius and making
light of the righteousness of Po Yi,3 though I never believed them. Now,
however, I have seen your unfathomable vastness. If I hadn't come to your
gate,4 I should have been in danger. I should forever have been laughed at by
the masters of the Great Method!" 1 The Lord of the River, the god of the
Yellow River, has already ap­ peared on p. 78, under the name P'ing-i. The
god of the sea. Po Yi, who relinquished his kingdom to his brother and later
chose to die of starvation rather than serve a ruler he considered unjust,
was regarded as a model of righteousness. The Lord of the River has literally
come to the gate of the sea. But a second meaning is implied, that is, "U I
hadn't become your disciple."
