	The Secret of Caring for Life	49 happened to come because it was his
time, and he happened to leave because things follow along. If you are
content with the time and willing to follow along, then grief and joy have no
way to enter in. In the old days, this was called being freed from the bonds
of God. "Though the grease burns out of the torch, the fire passes on, and no
one knows where it ends." 7 'The first part of this last sentence is scarcely
intelligible and there ace numerous suggestions on how it should be
interpreted or emended. I follow Chu Kuei-yao in reading "grease" instead of
"linger." For the sake of ref­ erence, I list some of the other possible
interpretations as I understand them. "When the lingers complete the work of
adding firewood, the lire passes on" (Kuo H?iang). "Though the lingers are
worn out gathering firewood, the £re passes on" (Yu Yueh). "\Vhat we can
point to are the fagots that have been consumed; but the lire is transmitted
elsewhere" (Legge, Fuku­ naga). ?	IN THE WORLD OF MEN (SECTION  4)




	Yen Hui went to see Confucius and asked permission to take a trip.1
"Where are you going?" 'Tm going to Wei." 'What will you do there?" "I have
heard that the ruler of Wei is very young. He acts in an independent manner,
thinks little of how he rules his state, and fails to see his faults. It is
nothing to him to lead his people into peril, and his dead are reckoned by
swampfuls like so much grass.2 His people have nowhere to turn. I have heard
you say, Master, 'Leave the state that is well ordered and go to the state in
chaos! At the doctor's gate are many sick men.' I want to use these words as
my standard, in hopes that I can restore his state to health." "Ah," said
Confucius, "you will probably go and get yourself executed, that's all. The
Way doesn't want things mixed in with it. When it becomes a mixture, it
becomes many. ways; with many ways, there is a lot of bustle; and where there
is a lot of bustle, there is trouble-trouble that has no remedy! The Perfect
Man of ancient times made sure that he had it in him- 'Yen Hui was Confucius'
favorite disciple. Throughout this chapter Chuang Tzu refers to a number of
historical figures, many of whom appear in the Analects, though the speeches
and anecdotes which he invents for them have nothing to do with history.
'Omitting the Imo, following Hsi T'ung. But there are many other in­
tupretations of this peculiar sentence. self before he tried to give it to
others. When you're not even sure what you've got in yourself, how do you
have time to bother about what some tyrant is doing? "Do you know what it is
that destroys virtue, and where wisdom comes from? Virtue is destroyed by
fame, and wisdom comes out of wrangling. Fame is something to beat people
down with, and wisdom is a device for wrangling. Both are evil weapons-not
the sort of thing to bring you success. Though your virtue may be great and
your good faith unassail­ able, if you do not understand men's spirits,
though your fame may be wide and you do not strive with others, if you do not
understand men's minds, but instead appear before a tyrant and force him to
listen to sermons on benevolence and right­ eousness, measures and
standards-this is simply using other men's bad points to parade your own
excellence. You will be called a plaguer of others. He who plagues others
will be plagued in turn. You will probably be plagued by this man. "And
suppose he is the kind who actually delights in worthy men and hates the
unworthy-then  why does he need you to try to make him any different? You had
best keep your ad vice to yourself! Kings and dukes always lord it over
others and fight to win the argument. You will find your eyes growing dazed,
your color changing, your mouth working to invent excuses, your attitude
becoming more and more humble, until in your mind you end by supporting him.
This is to pile fire on fire, to add water to water, and is called
'increasing the ex­ cessive.' If you give in at the beginning, there is no
place to stop. Since your fervent advice is almost certain not to be be­
lieved, you are bound to die if you come into the presence of a tyrant. "In
ancient times Chieh put Kuan Lung-feng to death and Chou put Prince Pi Kan to
death. Both Kuan Lung-feng and Prince Pi Kan were scrupulous in their
conduct, bent down to comfort and aid the common people, and used their
positions as ministers to oppose their superiors. Therefore their rulers,
Chieh and Chou, utilized their scrupulous conduct as a means to trap them,
for they were too fond of good fame. In ancient times Yao attacked
Ts'ung-chih and Hsil-ao, and Yil attacked Yu-hu, and these states were left
empty and unpeopled, their rulers cut down. It was because they employed
their armies constantly and never ceased their search for gain. All were
seekers of fame or gain-have you alone not heard of them? Even the sages
cannot cope with men who are after fame or gain, much less a person like you!
"However, you must have some plan in mind. Come, tell me what it is." Yen Hui
said, "If I am grave and empty-hearted, diligent and of one mind, won't that
do"?" "Goodness, how could that do? You may put on a fine out­ ward show and
seem very impressive, but you can't avoid hav­ ing an uncertain look on your
face, any more than an ordinary man can.3 And then you try to gauge this
man's feelings and seek to influence his mind. But with him, what is called
'the virtue that advances a little each day' would not succeed, much less a
great display of virtue! He will stick fast to his position and never be
converted. Though he may make outward signs of agreement, inwardly he will
not give it a thought! How could such an approach succeed?" "\Vell then,
suppose I am inwardly direct, outwardly com­ pliant, and do my work through
the examples of antiquity? I follow Ma Hsii-lun in taking this sentence to
refer to Yen Hui. The older interpretation of Kuo Hsiang takes it to mean:
"He (the ruler of Wei) puts on a line outward show and is very overbearing;
his expression is never fixed, and ordinary men do not try to oppase him." By
being inwardly direct, I can be the companion of Heaven. Being a companion of
Heaven, I know that the Son of Heaven and I are equally the sons of Heaven.
Then why would I use my words to try to get men to praise me, or try to get
them not to praise me? A man like this, people call The Child. This is what I
mean by being a companion of Heaven. "By being outwardly compliant, I can be
a companion of men. Lifting up the tablet, kneeling, bowing, crouching down
-this is the etiquette of a minister. Everybody does it, so why shouldn't I?
If I do what other people do, they can hardly criticize me. This is what I
mean by being a companion of men. "By doing my work through the examples of
antiquity, I can be the companion of ancient times. Though my words may in
fact be lessons and reproaches, they belong to ancient times and not to me.
In this way, though I may be blunt, I cannot be blamed. This is what I mean
by being a companion of antiquity. If I go about it in this way, will it do?"
Confucius said, "Goodness, how could that do? You have too many policies and
plans and you haven't seen what is needed. You will probably get off without
incurring any blame, yes. But that will be as far as it goes. How do you
think you can actually convert him? You are still making the mind' your
teacher!" Yen 1 Iui said, "I have nothing more to offer. May I ask the proper
way.)" "You must fast!" said Confucius. "I will tell you what that means. Do
you think it is easy to do anything while you have a mind? If you do, Bright
Heaven will not sanction you." Yen Hui said, "My family is poor. I haven't
drunk wine or Not the natural or "given" mind, but the mind which makes
artinciaJ distinctions. eaten any strong foods for several months. So can I
be con­ sidered as having fasted?" 'That is the fasting one does before a
sacrifice, not the fast­ ing of the mind." "May I ask what the fasting of the
mind is?" Confucius said, "Make your will one! Don't listen with your ears,
listen with your mind. No, don't listen with your mind, but listen with your
spirit. Listening stops with the ears, the mind stops with recognition, but
spirit is empty and waits on all things. The Way gathers in emptiness alone.
Emptiness is the fasting of the mind." Yen Hui said, "Before I heard this, I
was certain that I was Hui. But now that I have heard it, there is no more
Hui. Can this be called emptiness?" 'That's all there is to it," said
Confucius. "Now I will tell you. You may go and play in his bird cage, but
never be moved by fame. If he listens, then sing; if not, keep still. Have no
gate, no opening/ but make oneness your house and live with what cannot be
avoided. Then you will be close to success. "It is easy to keep from walking;
the hard thing is to walk without touching the ground. It is easy to cheat
when you work for men, but hard to cheat when you work for Heaven. You have
heard of Hying with wings, but you have never heard of flying without wings.
You have heard of the knowledge that knows, but you have never heard of the
knowledge that does not know. Look into that closed room, the empty chamber
where brightness is born! Fortune and blessing gather where there is
stillness. But if you do not keep still-this is what is called sitting but
racing around.6 Let your ears and eyes com- Following Chang Ping-Jin, I read
tou instead of tu. ' The body sits hut the mind continues to race. municate
with what is inside, and put mind and knowledge on the outside. Then even
gods and spirits will come to dwell, not to speak of men! This is the
changing of the ten thousand things, the bond of Yii and Shun, the constant
practice of Fu Hsi and Chi Ch'ii.; How much more should it be a rule for
lesser men!"

	Tzu-kao, duke of She,8 who was being sent on a mission to Ch'i, consulted
Confucius. "The king is sending me on a very important mission. Ch'i will
probably treat me with great honor but will be in no hurry to do anything
more. Even a commoner cannot be forced to act, much less one of the feudal
lords. I am very worried about it. You once said to me, 'In all affairs,
whether large or small, there are few men who reach a happy conclusion except
through the \Vay. If you do not succeed, you are bound to suffer from the
judgment of men. If you do succeed, you arc bound to suffer from the yin and
yang.9 To suffer no harm whether you succeed or not-only the man who has
virtue can do that.' I am a man who eats plain food that is simply cooked, so
that no one ever complains of the heat in my kitchens.10 Yet this morning I
received my orders from the king and by evening I am gulping ice water­ do
you suppose I have developed some kind of internal fever? I have not even
gone to Ch'i to see what the situation is like and already I am suffering
from the yin and yang. And if I do not succeed, I am bound to suffer from the
judgment of Mythical sage rulers. A high minister of Ch'u and relative of the
king. The excitement and worry of success will upset the balance of the yin
and yang within the body and bring about sickness. 1• The latter part of the
sentence is barely intelligible and the translation tentative. Legge's
interpretation is ingenious, though strained: "In my diet I take what is
coarse, and do not seek delicacies,-a man whose cookery does not require him
to be using cooling drinks." men. I will have both worries. As a minister, I
am not capable of carrying out this mission. But perhaps you have some advice
ycu can give me . . ." Confucius said, "In the world, there are two great
decrees: one is fate and the other is duty.11 That a son should love his
parents is fate-you cannot erase this from his heart. That a subject should
serve his ruler is duty-there is no place he can go and be without his ruler,
no place he can escape to between heaven and earth. These are called the
great decrees. Therefore, to serve your parents and be content to follow them
anywhere-this is the perfection of filial piety. To serve your ruler and be
content to do anything for him-this is the peak of loyalty. And to serve your
own mind so that sadness or joy do not sway or move it; to understand what
you can do nothing about and to be content with it as with fate-this is the
perfection of virtue. As a subject and a son, you are bound to find things
you cannot avoid. If you act in accordance with the state of affairs and
forget about yourself, then what leisure will you have to love life and hate
death? Act in this \vay and you will be all right. "I want to tell you
something else I have learned. In :ill human relations, if the two parties
are living close to each other, they may form a bond through personal trust.
But if they are far apart, they must use words to comrr.unicate their
loyalty, and words must be transmitted by someone. To trans­ mit words that
are either pleasing to both parties or infuriating to both parties is one of
the most difficult things in the world. Where both parties are pleased, there
must be some exaggera­ tion of the good points; and where both parties are
angered, there must be some exaggeration of the bad points. Anything that
smacks of exaggeration is irresponsible. Where there is 11 Yi, elsewhere
translated as "righteousness." In the \Vorld of Men	57 irresponsibility,
no one will trust what is said, and when that happens, the man who is
transmitting the words will be in danger. Therefore the aphorism says,
'Transmit the established facts; do not transmit words of exaggeration.' If
you do that, you will probably come out all right. "\Vhen men get together to
pit their strength in games of skill, they start off in a light and friendly
mood, but usually end up in a dark and angry one, and if they go on too long
they start resorting to various underhanded tricks. vVhen men meet at some
ceremony to drink, they start off in an orderly manner, but usually end up in
disorder, and if they go on too long they start indulging in various
irregular amusements. It is the same with all things. \Vhat starts out being
sincere usually ends up being deceitful. What was simple in the beginning
acquires monstrous proportions in the end. "\Vords are like \Vind and waves;
actions are a matter of gain and loss. Wind and waves are easily moved;
questions of gain anJ loss easily lead to danger. Hence anger arises from no
other cause than clever words and one-sided speeches. vVhen animals face
death, they do not care what cries they make; their breath comes in gasps and
a wild fierceness is born in their hearts. [Men, too,) if you press them too
hard, are bound to answer ycu with ill-natured hearts, though they do not
know why they do so. 1f they themselves do not understand why they behave
like this, then who knows where it will end? "Therefore the aphorism says,
'Do not deviate from your orders; do not press for completion.' To go beyond
the limit is excess; to deviate from orders or press for completion is a
dangerous thing. A good completion takes a long time; a bad completion cannot
be changed later. Can you afford to be careless? "Just go along with things
and let your mind move freely. Resign yourself to what cannot be avoided and
nourish what is within you-this is best. What more do you have to do to
fulfill your mission? Nothing is as good as following orders (obeying
fate)-that's how difficult it is!" 12

	Yen Ho, who had been appointed tutor to the crown prince, son of Duke
Ling of Wei, went to consult Chii Po-yi..i.13 "Here is this man who by nature
is lacking in virtue. If I let him go on with his unruliness I will endanger
the state. If I try to impose some rule on him, I will endanger myself. He
knows enough to recognize the faults of others, but he doesn't know his own
faults. What can I do with a man like this?" "A very good question," said
Chii Po-yii. "Be careful, be on your guard, and make sure that you yourself
are in the right! In your actions it is best to follow along with him, and in
your mind it is best to harmonize with him. However, these two courses
involve certain dangers. Though you follow along, you don't want to be pulled
into his doings, and though you harmonize, you don't want to be drawn out too
far. If in your actions you follow along to the extent of being pulled in
with him, then you will be overthrown, destroyed, wiped out, and brought to
your knees. If in your mind you harmonize to the extent of being drawn out,
then you will be talked about, named, blamed, and condemned. If he wants to
be a child, be 12 The phrase chih ming can be interpreted either as
"following orders" or as "obeying fate," and both meanings are almost
certainly intended. Since for Chuang Tzu obeying fate is an extremely easy
thing to do, the la?t part of the sentence is ironic. Throughout this passage
Confucius, while appearing to give advice on how to carry out a diplomatic
mission, is in fact enunciating Chuang Tzu's code for successful behavior in
general. "Yen Ho was a scholar of Lu, Chii Po-yii a minister of Wei. The
crown prince is the notorious K'uai-k'uei, who was forced to See from Wei
because he plotted to kill his mother. He reentered the state and seized the
throne from bis son in 48 I B.c. a child with him. If he wants to follow
erratic ways, follow erratic ways with him. If he wants to be reckless, be
reckless with him. Understand him thoroughly, and lead him to the point where
he is without fault.u "Don't you know about the praying mantis that waved its
arms angrily in front of an approaching carriage, unaware that they were
incapable of stopping it? Such was the high opinion it had of its talents. Be
careful, be on your guard! If you offend him by parading your store of
talents, you will be in danger! "Don't you know how the tiger trainer goes
about it? He doesn't dare give the tiger any living thing to eat for fear it
will learn the taste of fury by killing it. He doesn't dare give it any whole
thing to eat for fear it will learn the taste of fury by tearing it apart. He
gauges the state of the tiger's appetite and thoroughly understands its
fierce disposition. Tigers are a different breed from men, and yet you can
train them to be gentle with their keepers by following along with them. The
men who get killed are the ones who go against them. "The horse lover will
use a fine box to catch the dung and a giant clam shell to catch the stale.
But if a mosquito or a fly lights on the horse and he slaps it at the wrong
time, then the horse will break the bit, hurt its head, and bang its chest.
The horse lover tries to think of everything, but his affection leads him
into error. Can you afford to be careless?"

	Carpenter Shih went to Ch'i and, when he got to Crooked Shaft, he saw a
serrate oak standing by the village shrine. It "Waley (Three Ways of Thought
in Ancient China, p. 109) translates, "And if you probe him, do so in a part
where his skin is not sore," taking the verb 14, which I have translated as
"understand thoroughly," to refer to acupuncture. 60	Chuang Tzu was broad
enough to shelter several thousand oxen and meas­ ured a hundred spans
around, towering above the hills. The lowest branches were eighty feet from
the ground, and a dozen or so of them could have been made into boats. There
were so many sightseers that the place looked like a fair, but the carpenter
didn't even glance around and went on his way without stopping. His
apprentice stood staring for a long time and then ran after Carpenter Shih
and said, "Since I first took up my ax and followed you, Master, I have never
seen timber as beautiful as this. But you don't even bother to look, and go
right on without stopping. Why is that?" "Forget it-say no more!" said the
carpenter. "It's a worthless tree! Make boats out of it and they'd sink; make
coffins and they'd rot in no time; make vessels and they'd break at once. Use
it for doors and it would sweat sap like pine; use it for posts and the worms
would eat them up. It's not a timber tree--there's nothing it can be used
for. That's how it got to be that old!" After Carpenter Shih had returned
home, the oak tree appeared to him in a dream and said, "What are you compar­
ing me with? Are you comparing me with those useful trees? The cherry apple,
the pear, the orange, the citron, the rest of those fructiferous trees and
shrubs-as soon as their fruit is ripe, they are torn apart and subjected to
abuse. Their big limbs are broken off, their little limbs are yanked around.
Their utility makes life miserable for them, and so they don't get to finish
out the years Heaven gave them, but are cut off in mid­ journey. They bring
it on themselves-the pulling and tearing of the common mob. And it's the same
way with all other things. "As for me, I've been trying a long time to be of
no use, and though I almost died, I've finally got it. This is of great use
to me. If I had been of some use, would I ever have grown this large?
Moreover you and I are both of us things. What's the point of this-things
condemning things? You, a worthless man about to die-how do you know I'm a
worthless tree?" When Carpenter Shih woke up, he reported his dream. His
apprentice said, "If it's so intent on being of no use, what's it doing there
at the village shrine?" 1? "Shhh! Say no more! It's only resting there. If we
carp and criticize, it will merely conclude that we don't understand it. Even
if it weren't at the shrine, do you suppose it would be cut down? It protects
itself in a different way from ordinary people. If you try to judge it by
conventional standards, you'll be way off!"

	Tzu-ch'i of Nan-po was wandering around the Hill ot Shang when he saw a
huge tree there, different from all the rest. A thousand teams of horses
could have taken shelter under it and its shade would have covered them all.
Tzu-ch'i said, "What tree is this? It must certainly have some extraor­
dinary usefulness!" But, looking up, he saw that the smaller limbs were
gnarled and twisted, unfit for beams or rafters, and looking down, he saw
that the trunk was pitted and rotten and could not be used for coffins. He
licked one of the leaves and it blistered his mouth and made it sore. He
sniffed the odor and it was enough to make a man drunk for three days. "It
turns out to be a completely unusable tree," said Tzu-ch'i, "and so it has
been able to grow this big. Ahal-it is this unusableness that the Holy Man
makes use of!" The region of Ching-shih in Sung is fine for growing ca­
talpas, cypresses, and mulberries. But those that are more than

	,. The shrine, or altar of the soil, was always situated in a grove of
beau­ tiful trees. So the oak was serving a pwpose by lending an air of
sanctity to the spot. 62	Chuang Tzu one or two arm-lengths around are cut
down for people who want monkey perches; those that are three or four spans
around are cut down for the ridgepoles of tall roofs;16 and those that are
seven or eight spans are cut down for the families of nobles or rich
merchants who want side boards for coffins. So they never get to live out the
years Heaven gave them, but are cut down in mid-journey by axes. This is the
danger of being usable. In the Chieh sacrifice,17 oxen with white foreheads,
pigs with turned-up snouts, and men with piles cannot be offered to the
river. This is something all the shamans know, and hence they consider them
inauspicious creatures. But the Holy Man for the same reason considers them
highly auspi­ cious.

	There's Crippled Shu--chin stuck down in his navel, shoul­ ders up above
his head, pigtail pointing at the sky, his five organs on the top, his two
thighs pressing his ribs. By sewing and washing, he gets enough to fill his
mouth; by handling a winnow and sifting out the good grain, he makes enough
to feed ten people. When the authorities call out the troops, he stands in
the crowd waving good-by; when they get up a big work party, they pass him
over because he's a chronic invalid. And when they are doling out grain to
the ailing, he gets three big measures and ten bundles of firewood. With a
crippled body, he's still able to look after himself and finish out the years
Heaven gave him. How much better, then, if he had crippled virtue! 1•
Following Ma Hsii-lun, I read mien (roof) in place of ming. 17 Probably a
spring sacrifice for the "dispelling (chieh) of sins," though there are other
interpretations. Sacrifices of animals, and sometimes human beings, were made
to the Lord of the River, the god of the Yellow River.
