
	?		THE GREAT AND VENERABLE TEACHER (SECTION 6)


	Hewho knows what lit is that Heaven does, and knows what it is that man
does, has reached the peak. Knowing what it is that Heaven does, he lives
wlith Heaven. Knowling what it is that man does, he uses the knowledge of
what he knows to help out the knowledge of what he doesn't kmow, and lives
out the years that Heaven gave him without being cut off midway-this is the
perfection of knowledge. However, there :is a difficulty. Knowledge must wait
for something before it can be applicab]e, and that which it waits for is
never certain. How, then, can I know that what I call Heaven is not really
man, and what I call man is not really Heaven? There must first be a Tme Man
I before there can be true knowledge. What do I mean by a True Man? The 'frue
Man of ancient times did not rebel agains.t want, did not grow proud in
plenty, and did not plan his affairs. A man like this could commit an error
and not regret it, could meet wlith success and not make a show. A man like
this could climb the high places and not be frightened, cou]d enter the water
and not get wet, could enter the fire "nd not get burned. His knowledge was
able to climb all the way up to the Way like this. The True Man of ancient
times slept without dreaming 1 Another term for the Taoist sage, synonymous
with the Pezfect Man or the Holy Man. 74	Chuang Trn and woke without care;
he ate without savoring and his breath came from deep inside. The True Man
breathes with his heels; the mass of men breathe with their throats. Crushed
and bound down, they gasp out their words as though they were retching. Deep
in their passions and desires, they are shallow in the workings of Heaven.
The True Man of ancient times knew nothing of loving life, knew nothing of
hating death. He emerged without delight; he went back in without a fuss. He
came briskly, he went briskly, and that was all. He didn't forget where he
began; he didn't try to find out where he would end. He received something
and took pleasure in it; he forgot about it and handed it back again. This is
what I call not using the mind to repel the Way, not using man to help out
Heaven. This is what I call the True Man. Since he is like this, his mind
forgets/ his face is calm; his forehead is broad. He is chilly like autumn,
balmy like spring, and his joy and anger prevail through the four seasons. He
goes along with what is right for things and no one knows his limit.
Therefore, when the sage calls out the troops, he may overthrow nations but
he will not lose the hearts of the people. His bounty enriches ten thousand
ages but he has no love for men. Therefore he who delights in bringing
success to things is not a sage; he who has affections is not benevolent; he
who looks for the right time is not a worthy man; he who cannot encompass
both profit and loss is not a gentleman; he who thinks of conduct and fame
and misleads himself is not a man of breeding; and he who de­ stroys himself
and is without truth is not a user of men. Those like Hu Pu-hsieh, \Vu Kuang,
Po Yi, Shu  Ch'i, Chi Tzu, Reading wang imt«ad of cl,ih in accordance with
th<! mggcition o! 'Nang Mao-hung. Hsu Yu, Chi To, and Shen-t'u Ti-all of them
slaved in the service of other men, took joy in bringing other men joy, but
could not find joy in any joy of their own.3 This was the True Man of old:
his bearing was lofty and did not crumble; he appeared to lack but accepted
nothing; he was dignified in his correctness but not inisistent; he was vast
in his emptiness but not ostentatious. Mild and cheerful, he seemed to be
happy; reluctant, he could not help doing certain things; annoyed, he let it
show in his face; relaxed, he rested in his virtue. Tolerant/ he seemed to be
part of the world; towering alone, he could be checked by nothing; withdrawn,
he seemed to prefer to cut himself off; bemused, he forgot what he was going
to say.5 He regarded penalties as the body, rites as the wings, wis­ dom as
what is timely, virtue as what is reasonable. Because he regarded penalties
as the body, he was benign in his killing. Because he regarded rites as the
wings, he got along in the world. Because he regarded wisdom as what is
timely, there were things that he could not keep from doing. Because he
regarded virtue as what is reasonable, he was like a man with two feet who
gets to the top of the hill. And yet people really believed that he worked
hard to get there.6 Therefore his liking was one and his not liking was one.
According to legend, these were men who either tried to reform the con­ duct
of others or made a show of guarding their own integrity. All either were
killed or committed suicide. Following the Ts'ui text, which reads kuang.
There are many different interpretations of the words used to describe the
True Man in this paragraph. I have followed those adopted by Fuku­ r,aga. As
pointed out by Fukunaga, this paragraph, which describes the Taoist ?agt &s &
ruler who employ? penalties, rites, wisdom, and virtue, seems out l'.Jf
keeping witL Chu ..r,g T:cu', i,hilo,ophy a, expressed elsewhere. Fukunaga
suggests that it i, i.r. i.dditic.n, b)' n writt:1 1'.Jl tL.t: 3d vl :.d
ceu:uri1;s i,.,;. wht. M,s mfluenctd by Ltgi.list thought. His being one was
one and his not being one was one. In being one, he was acting as a companion
of Heaven. In not being one, he was acting as a companion of man. When man
and Heaven do not defeat each other, then we may be said to have the True
Man. Life and death are fated-constant as the s:iccession of dark and dawn, a
matter of Heaven. There are some things which man can do nothing about-all
are a matter of the nature of creatures. If a man is willing to regard Heaven
as a father and to love it, then how much more should he be willing to do for
that which is even greater! 7 If he is willing to regard the ruler as
superior to himself and to die for him, then how much more should he be
willing to do for the Truth! When the springs dry up and the fish are left
stranded on the ground, they spew each other with moisture and wet each other
down with spit-but it would be much better if they could forget each other in
the rivers and lakes. Instead of praising Yao and condemning Chieh, it would
be better to forget both of them and transform yourself with the Way. The
Great Clod burdens me with form, labors me with life, eases me in old age,
and rests me in death. So if I think well of my life, for the same reason I
must think well of my death.8 You hide your boat in the ravine and your fish
net9 in the swamp and tell yourself that they will be safe. But in the middle
of the night a strong man shoulders them and carries 'Since Chuang Tzu
elsewhere uses T'ie,. or Heaven as a synonym of the Wav. this passage has
troubled commentators. Some wo1.1ld emend tae orde1 of the words to read "If
a man is willing to regard his father as Heaven," or wmtld substitute jen for
T'ien, that is, "If a man is willing to regard gnother man as his father." Or
perhaps the meaning is: "So if it makes my life good, it must for the =e 
reason make my death good.'' Following the interpretation of Yii Yuen. them
off, and in your stupidity you don't know why it hap­ pened. You think you do
right to hide little things in big ones, and yet they get away from you. But
if you were to hide the world in the world, so that nothing could get away,
this would be the final reality of the constancy of things. You have had the
audacity to take on human form and you are delighted. But the human form has
ten thousand changes that never come to an end. Your joys, then, must be un­
countable. Therefore, the sage wanders in the realm where things cannot get
away from him, and all are preserved. He delights in early death; he delights
in old age; he delights in the beginning; he delights in the end. If he can
serve as a model for men, how much more so that which the ten thousand things
are tied to and all changes alike wait upon! The Way has its reality and its
signs but is without action or form. You can hand it down but you cannot
receive it; you can get it but you cannot see it. It is its own source, its
own root. Before Heaven and earth existed it was there, firm from ancient
times. It gave spirituality to the spirits and to God; it gave birth to
Heaven and to earth. It exists beyond the highest point, and yet you cannot
call it lofty; it exists beneath the limit of the six directions, and yet you
cannot call it deep. It was born before Heaven and earth, and yet you cannot
say it has been there for long; it is earlier than the earliest time, and yet
you cannot call it old. Hsi-wei got it and held up heaven and earth.1°Fu-hsi
got it and entered into the mother of breath. The Big Dip?r got it and from
ancient times has never wavered. The Sun and Moon got it and from ancient
times have never rested. K'an- 10 The figures in this paragraph are all
deities or mythical beings, but the myths to which Chuang Tzu refers are in
many cases unknown, so that the translation is tentative in places. p'i got
it and entered K'un-lun. P'ing-i got it and wandered in the great river.
Chien Wu got it and lived in the great moun­ tain.11 The Yellow Emperor got
it and ascended to the cloudy heavens. Chuan Hsu got it and dwelt in the Dark
Palace. Yu-ch'iang got it and stood at the limit of the north. The Queen
Mother of the West got it and took her seat on Shao-kuang-nobody knows her
beginning, nobody knows her end. P'eng-tsu got it and lived from the age of
Shun to the age of the Five Dictators.12 Fu Yueh got it and became minister
to Wu-ting, who extended his rule over the whole world; then Fu Yueh climbed
up to the Eastern Governor, straddled the \Vinnowing Basket and the Tail, and
took his place among the ranks of stars.13

	Nan-po Tzu-k'uei said to the Woman Crookback, "You are old in years and
yet your complexion is that of a child. Why is this?" "I have heard the Way!"
"Can the \Vay be learned?" asked Nan-po Tzu-k'uei. "Goodness, how could that
be? Anyway, you aren't the man to do it. Now there's Pu-Jiang Yi-he has the
talent of a sage but not the \Vay of a sage, whereas I have the Way of a sage
but not the talent of a sage. I thought I would try to teach him and see if I
could really get anywhere near to making him a 11 K'an-p'i is the god of the
mythical K'un-lun Mountains of the west, P'ing-i is the god of the Yellow
River, and Chien Wu is the god of Mount T'ai. u The Yellow Emperor and Clman
Hsii are legendary rulers. The Queen Mother of the West is an immortal spirit
who lives in the far west. Yii-<:h'iang is a deity of the far north.
P'eng-tsu's life span as given here extends, by traditional dating, from the
26th to the 7th centuries B.c. ,.. Fu Yueh is frequently mentioned as a
minister to the Shang ruler Wu-ting (traditional dates 1324-1266 a.c.), but
little is known of the legend that he ascended to the sky and became a star.
sage. It\ easier to explain the Way of a sage to someone who has the talent
of a sage, you know. So I began explaining and kept at him for three days,14
and after that he was able to put the world outside himself. When he had put
the world out­ side himself, I kept at him for seven days more, and after
that he was able to put things outside himself. \Vhen he had put things
outside himself, I kept at him for nine days more, and after that he was able
to put life outside himself. After he had put life outside himself, he was
able to achieve the brightness of dawn, and when he had achieved the
brightness of dawn, he could see his own aloneness. After he had managed to
see his own aloneness, he could do away with past and present, and after he
had done away with past and present, he was able to enter where there is no
life and no death. That which kills life does not die; that which gives life
to life does not live.15 This is the kind of thing it is: there's nothing it
doesn't send off, nothing it doesn't welcome, nothing it doesn't de­ stroy,
nothing it doesn't complete. Its name is Peace-in-Strife. After the strife,
it attains completion." Nan-po Tzu-k'uei asked, "Where did you happen to hear
this?" "I heard it from the son of Aided-by-Ink, and Aided-by-Ink heard it
from the grandson of Repeated-Recitation, and the grandson of
Repeated-Recitation heard it horn Seeing­ Brightly, and Seeing-Brightly heard
it from Whispered­ Agreement, and Whispered-Agreement heard it from Wait­
ing-for-Use, and Waiting-for-Use heard it from Exclaimed­ Wonder, and
Exclaimed-Wonder heard  it from  Dark-Ob- "Following the suggestion of \Ven
I-to, I reverse the position of shou and kao. ,. I.e., that which transcends
the categories of life and death can never be said to have lived or died;
only that which recognizes the existence of such categories is subject to
them. scurity, and Dark-Obscurity heard it from Participation-in­ Mystery,
and Participation-in-Mystery heard it from Copy­ the-Source!" 16

	Master Ssu, Master Yu, Master Li, and Master Lai were all four talking
together. "Who can look upon nonbeing as·his head, on life as his back, and
on death as his rump?" they said. "Who knows that life and death, existence
and annihila­ tion, are all a single body? I will be his friend!" The four
men looked at each other and smiled. There was no disagreement in their
hearts and so the four of them bccamf! friends. All at once Master Yu fell
ill. Master Ssu went to ask how he was. "Amazing!" said Master Yu. "The
Creator is making me all crookedy like this! My back sticks up like a
hunchback and my vital organs are on top of me. My chin is hidden in my
navel, my shoulders are up above my head, and my pig­ tail points at the sky.
It must be some dislocation of the yin and yang!" Yet he seemed calm at heart
and unconcerned. Dragging himself haltingly to the well, he looked at his
reflection and said, "My, my! So the Creator is making me all crookedy like
thisl" "Do you resent it?" asked Master Ssu. 'Why no, what would I resent? If
the process continues, perhaps in time he'll transform my left arm into a
rooster. In that case I'll keep watch on the night. Or perhaps in time he'll
transform my right arm into a crossbow pellet and I'll "Reading ni-shih
instead of i-shih for the last name. But these names are open to a variety of
interpretatious. The whole list, of course, is a parody o.f the 6liations of
the other schools of philosophy. shoot down an owl for roasting. Or perhaps
in time he'll trans­ form my buttocks into cartwheels. Then, with my spirit
fol a horse, I'll climb up and go for a ride. \Vhat need will I ever have for
a carriage again? "I received life because the time had come; I will lose it
because the order of things passes on. Be content w;th this time and dwell in
this order and then neither sorrow nor joy can touch you. In ancient times
this was called the 'freeing of the bound.' There are those who cannot free
themselves, because they are bound by things. But nothing can ever win
against Heaven-that's the way it's always been. \Vhat would I have to
resent?" Suddenly Master Lai grew ill. Gasping and wheezing, he lay at the
point of death. His wife and children gathered round in a circle and began to
cry. fl.laster Li, who had come to ask how he was, said, "Shoo! Get back!
Don't disturb the process of change!" Then he leaned against the doorway and
talked to Master Lai. "How marvelous the Creator isl \\That is he going to
make out of yon next? \Vhere is he going to send you? \Vill he make you into
a rat's liver? \Nill he make you into a bug's ann.)" fl..Iaster Lai said, "A
child, obeying his father and mother, goes wherever he is told, east or west,
south or north. And the yin and yang-how much more are they to a man than
father or mother! Now that they have brought me to the verge of death, if I
should refuse to obey them, how perverse I would be! What fault is it of
theirs? The Great Clod bur­ dens me with form, labors me with life, eases me
in old age, and rests me in death. So if I think well of my life, for the
same reason I must think well of my death. When a skilled smith is casting
metal, if the me?al should leap up and say, 'I insist upon being made into a
Mo-yeh!' 17 he would surely regard it as very inauspicious metal indeed. Now,
having had the audacity to take on human form once, if I should say, 'I don't
want to be anything but a man! Nothing but a man!', the Creator would surely
regard me as a most inauspicious sort of person. So now I think of heaven and
earth as a great furnace, and the Creator as a skilled smith. Where could he
send me that would not be all right? I will go off to sleep peacefully, and
then with a start I will wake up." Master Sang-bu, Meng-tzu Fan, and Master
Ch'in-chang, three friends, said to each other, "Who can join with others
without joining with others? Who can do with others without doing with
others? Who can climb up to heaven and wander in the mists, roam the
infinite, and forget life forever and forever?" The three men looked at each
other and smiled. There was no disagreement in their hearts and so they
became friends. After some time had passed without event, Master Sang­ bu
died. He had not yet been buried when Confucius, hear­ ing of his death, sent
T zu-kung to assist at the funeral. When Tzu-kung arrived, he found one of
the dead man's friends weaving frames for silkworms, while the other strummed
a lute. Joining their voices, they sang this song: Ah, Sang-hu! Ah, Sang-hu!
You have gone back to your true form While we remain as men, 0[ Tzu-kung
hastened forward and said, "May I be so bold as to ask what sort of ceremony
this is-singing in the very presence of the corpse?" The  two men looked at
each other and laughed. "What "A famous sword of King Ho-Iii (r. 514-496
B.c.) of Wu. does this man know of the meaning of ceremony?" they said.
Tzu-kung returned and reported to Confucius what had happened. "What sort of
men are they anyway?" he asked. "They pay no attention to proper behavior,
disregard their personal appearance and, without so much as changing the
expression on their faces, sing in the very presence of the corpse! I can
think of no name for them! What sort of men are they?" "Such men as they,"
said Confucius, "wander beyond the realm; men like me wander within it.
Beyond and within can never meet. It was stupid of me to send you to offer
con­ dolences. Even now they have joined with the Creator as men to wander in
the single breath of heaven and earth. They look upon life as a swelling
tumor, a protruding wen, and upon death as the draining of a sore or the
bursting of a boil. To men such as these, how could there be any question of
putting life first or death last? They borrow the forms of different
creatures and house them in the same body. They forget liver and gall, cast
aside ears and eyes, turning and revolving, ending and beginning again,
unaware of where they start or finish. Idly they roam beyond the dust and
dirt; they wander free and easy in the service of inaction. Why should they
fret and fuss about the ceremonies of the vulgar world and make a display for
the ears and eyes of the com­ mon herd?" Tzu-kung said, "Well then, Master,
what is this 'realm' that you stick to?" Confucius said, "I am one of those
men punished by Heaven. Nevertheless, I will share with you what I have."
"Then may I ask about the realm?" 18 said Tzu-kung. '"The word fang, which I
have translated as "realm," may also mean "method" or "procedure," and
Confucius' answer seems to stress this latto: meaning. Confucius said, "Fish
thrive in water, man thrives in the Way. For those that thrive in water, dig
a pond and they will find nourishment enough. For those that thrive in the
Way, don't bother about them and their lives will be secure. So it is said,
the fish forget each other in the rivers and lakes, and men forget each other
in the arts of the Way." Tzu-kung said, "May I ask about the singular man?"
"The singular man is singular in comparison to other men, but a companion of
Heaven. So it is said, the petty man of Heaven is a gentleman among men; the
gentleman among men is the petty man of Heaven."

	Yen Hui said to Confucius, 'When Meng-sun Ts'ai's mother died, he wailed
without shedding any tears, he did not grieve in his heart, and he conducted
the funeral without any look of sorrow. He fell down on these three counts,
and yet he is known all over the state of Lu for the excellent way he
rn,anaged the funeral. Is it really possible to gain such a reputation when
there are no facts to support it? I find it very peculiar indeed!" Confucius
said, "Meng-sun did all there was to do. He was advanced beyond ordinary
understanding and he would have simplified things even more, but that wasn't
practical. How­ ever, there is still a lot that he simplified. Meng-sun
doesn't know why he lives and doesn't know why he dies. He doesn't know why
he should go ahead; he doesn't know why he should fall behind. In the process
of change, he has become a thing (among other things]. and he is merely
waiting for some other change that he doesn't yet know about. Moreover, when
he is changing, how does he know that he is really changing? And when he is
not changing, how does he know that he hasn't already changed? You and I,
now-we are dreaming and haven't waked up yet. But in his case, though
something may startle his body, it won't injure his mind; though something
may alarm the house [his spirit lives in], his emotions will suffer no death.
Meng-sun alone has waked up. Men wail and so he wails, too-that's the reason
he acts like this. "What's more, we go around telling each other, I do this,
I do that-but how do we know that this T we talk about has any 'I' to it? You
dream you're a bird and soar up into the sky; you dream you're a fish and
dive down in the pool. But now when you tell me about it, I don't know
whether you are awake or whether you are dreaming. Running around accusing
others19 is not as good as laughing, and enjoying a good laugh is not as good
as going along with things. Be content to go along and forget about change
and then you can enter the mysterious oneness of Heaven."

	Yi Erh-tzu went to see Hsu Yu.20 Hsu Yu said, "What kind of assistance
has Yao been giving you?" Yi Erh-tzu said, "Yao told me, 'You must learn to
practice benevolence and righteousness and to speak clearly about right and
wrong!' " "Then why come to see me?" said Hsu Yu. "Yao has already tattooed
you with benevolence and righteousness and cut off your nose with right and
wrong.21 Now how do you •• Following Hsi Tung, I read tse instead of shih,
but the sentence is obscure and there are many interpretations. ,. A recluse
of the time of Emperor Yao. He has already appeared on p. 26 above. 11
Tattooing and cutting off the nose were common punishments. expect to go
wandering in any far-away, carefree, and as-you­ like-it paths?" "That may
be," said Yi Erh-tzu. "But I would like if I may to wander in a little corner
of them." "Impossible!" said Hsu Yu. "Eyes that are blind have no way to tell
the loveliness of faces and features; eyes with no pupils have no way to tell
the beauty of colored and em­ broidered silks." Yi Erh-tzu said, "Yes, but
Wu-chuang forgot her beauty, Chi.i-liang forgot his strength, and the Yellow
Emperor forgot his wisdom-all were content to be recast and remolded.22 How
do you know that the Creator will not wipe away my tattoo, stick my nose back
on again, and let me ride on the process of completion and follow after you,
Master?" "Ah-we can never tell," said Hsu Yu. "I will just speak to you about
the general outline. This Teacher of mine, this Teacher of mine-he passes
judgment on the ten thousand things but he doesn't think himself righteous;
his bounty extends to ten thousand generations but he doesn't think himself
benevolent. He is older than the highest antiquity but he doesn't think
himself long-lived; he covers heaven, bears up the earth, carves and fashions
countles5 forms, but he doesn't think himself skilled. It is with him alone I
wander."

	Yen Hui said, "I'm improving!" Confucius said, 'What do you mean by
that?" "'Judging from the context, Wu-chuang and Chii-liang must have been
noted for their beauty and strength respectively. Perhaps the former is the
same as the beautiful Mao-ch'iang already mentioned on p. 4r, above. All
these persons forgot themselves in the Way and were rernolded by the Creator.
"I've forgotten benevolence and righteousness!" 'That's good. But you still
haven't got it." Another day, the two met again and Yen Hui said, "I'm
improving!" ''\Vhat do you mean by that?" "I've forgotten rites and music!"
'That's good. But you still haven't got it." Another day, the two met again
and Yen Hui said, "I'm improving!" "What do you mean by that?" "I can sit
down and forget everything!" Confucius looked very startlec:! and said, "What
do you mean, sit down and forget everything?" Yen Hui said, "I smash up my
limbs and body, drive out perception and intellect, cast off form, do away
with under­ standing, and make myself identical with the Great Thorough­
fare. This is what I mean by sitting down and forgetting everything."
Confucius said, "If you're identical with it, you must have no more likes! If
you've been transformed, you must have no more constancy! So you really are a
worthy man after all! 23 With your permission, I'd like to become your
follower."

	Master Yu and Master Sang were friends. Once it rained incessantly for
ten days. Master Yu said to himself, Master Sang is probably having a bad
time, and he wrapped up some rice and took it for his friend to eat. When he
got to Master Chuang Tzu probably intends a humorous reference to the words
of C.Onfucius in Analects VI, 9: "The Master said, 'What a worthy man wa? H
U"l.!'" Sang's gate, he heard something like singing or crying, and someone
striking a lute and saying: Father? Mother? Heaven? Man? It was as though the
voice would not hold out and the singer were rushing to get through the
words. Master Yi.i went inside and said, "What do you mean­ singing a song
like that!" "I was pondering what it is that has brought me to this
extremity, but I couldn't find the answer. My father and mother surely
wouldn't wish this poverty on me. Heaven covers all without partiality; earth
bears up all without par­ tiality-heaven and earth surely wouldn't single me
out to make me poor. I try to discover who is doing it, but I can't get the
answer. Still, here I am-at the very extreme. It must be fate."
