	In the World of Men	63 When Confucius visited Ch'u, Chieh Yi.i, the
madman of Ch'u, wandered by his gate crying, "Phoenix, phoenix, how has
virtue failed! The future you cannot wait for; the past you cannot pursue.
When the world has the Way, the sage succeeds; when the world is without the
Way, the sage sur­ vives. In times like the present, we do well to escape
penalty. Good fortune is light as a feather, but nobody knows how to pick it
up. l\hsfortune is heavy as the earth, but nobody knows how to stay out of
its way. Leave off, leave off-this teaching men virtue! Dangerous,
dangerous-to mark off the ground and run! Fool, fool-don't spoil my walking!
I walk a crooked way-don't step on my feet. The mountain trees do themselves
hann; the grease in the torch burns itself up. The cinnamon can be eaten and
so it gets cut down; the lacquer tree can be used and so it gets hacked
apart. All men know the use of the useful, but nobody knows the use of the
useless!" 18 ,.. Chuang Tzu bases this passage on the somewhat similar
anecdote and song of the madman Chieh Yu in Analects XVIII, 5.

	?   THE  SIGN OF VIRTUE COMPLETE (SECTION  5)





	In Lu there was a man named Wang Tai who had had his fo0t cut off.1 He
had as many followers gathered around him as Confucius. Ch'ang Chi asked
Confucius, 'This Wang Tai who's lost a foot-how does he get to divide up Lu
with you, Master, and make half of it his disciples? He doesn't stand up and
teach, he doesn't sit down and discuss, yet they go to him empty and come
home full. Does he really have some wordless teaching, some formless way of
bringing the mind to completion? What sort of man is he?" Confucius said,
'This gentleman is a sage. It's just that I've been tardy and haven't gone to
see him yet. But if I go to him as my teacher, how much more should those who
are not my equals! Why only the state of Lu? I'll bring the whole world along
and we'll all become his followers!" Ch'ang Chi said, "If he's lost a foot
and is still superior to the Master, then how far above the common run of men
he must be! But if that's so, then what unique way does he have of using his
mind?" Confucius said, "Life and death are great affairs._.and yet they are
no change to him. Though heaven and earth flop over and fall down, it is no
loss to him. He sees clearly into w1'at has no falsehood and does not shift
with things. He take· it as 1 As a penalty for some offense. fate that things
should change, and he holds fast to the source." "What do you mean by that?"
asked Ch'ang Chi. Confucius said, "If you look at them from the point of view
of their differences, thtn there is liver and gall, Ch'u ar.d Yueh. But if
you look at them from the point of view of their sameness, then the ten
thousand things are all one. A man like this doesn't know what his ears or
eyes should apprave-he lets his mind play in the harmony of virtue. As for
things, he sees them as one and does not see their loss. He regards the loss
of a foot as a lump of earth thrown away." Ch'ang Chi said, "In the way he
goes about it, he uses his knowledge to get at his mind, and uses his mind to
get at the constant mind. Why should things gather around him?" Confucius
said, "Men do not mirror themselves in running water-they mirror themselves
in still water. Only what is still can still the stillness of other things.
Of those that receive life from the earth, the pine and cypress alone are
best-they stay as green as ever in winter or summer. Of those that receive
life from Heaven, Yao and Shun alone are best-they stand at the head of the
ten thousand things. Luckily they were able to order their lives, and thereby
order the lives of other things. Proof that a man is holding fast to the
beginning lies in the fact of his fearlessness. A brave soldier will plunge
alone into the midst of nine armies. He seeks fame and can bring him­ self to
this. How much more, then, is possible for a man who governs Heaven and
earth, stores up the ten thousand things, lets the six parts of his body2 be
only a dwelling, mo:kes orna­ ments of his ears and eyes, unifies the
knowledge of what he knows, and in his mind never tastes death. He will soon
choose the day and ascend far off. Men may become his followers, but how
could he be willing to bother himself about things?" The legs, ,nns, head,
and trunk. Shen-t'u Chia, who had lost a foot, was studying under Po­ hun
\Vu-jen along with Tzu-ch'an of Cheng.3 Tzu-ch'an said to Shen-t'u Chia, "If
I go out first, you stay behind, and if you go out first, I'll stay behind."
Next day the two of them were again sitting on the same mat in the same hall.
Tzu-ch'an said to Shen-t'u Chia, "If I go out first, you stay behind, and if
you go out first, I'll stay behind! Now I \.v:ill go out. Are you going to
stay behind or aren't you? When you see a prime minister, you don't even get
out of the way-do you think you're the equal of a prime minister?" Shen-t'u
Chia said, "Within the gates of the Master, is there any such thing as a
prime minister? You take delight in being a prime minister and pushing people
behind you. But I've heard that if the mirror is bright, no dust settles on
it; if dust settles, it isn't really bright. When you live around worthy men
a long time, you'll be free of faults. You regard the Master as a great man,
and yet you talk like this-it's not right, is it?" Tzu-ch'an said, "You, a
man like this-and still you claim to be better than a Yao! Take a look at
your virtue and see if it's not enough to give you cause to reflect!"
Shen-t'u Chia said, "People who excuse their faults and claim they didn't
deserve to be punished-there are lots of them. But those who don't excuse
their faults and who admit they didn't deserve to be spared-they are few. To
know what you can't do anything about, and to be content with it as you would
with fate--only a man of virtue can do that. If you play around in front of
Archer Yi's target, you're right in the way of the arrows, and if you don't
get hit, it's a matter of fate. There are lot? of men with two feet who laugh
at me for Tzu-ch'an (d  522 B.c.) was prime minister CA .he  state ot Cheng.
having only one. It makes me boil with rage, but I come here to the Master's
place and I feel calmed down again and go home. I don't know whether he
washes me clean with good­ ness, or whether I come to understand things by
myself. The Master and I have been friends for nineteen years and he's never
once let on that he's aware I'm missing a foot. Now you and I are supposed to
be wandering outside the realm of forms and bodies, and you come looking for
me inside it'-you're at fault, aren't you?'' Tzu-ch'an squirmed, changed his
expression, and put a different look on his face. "Say no more about it," he
s::ud.

	In Lu there was a man named Shu-shan No-Toes who had had his foot cut
off. Stumping along, he went to see Confucius. "You weren't careful enough!"
said Confucius. "Since you've already broken the law and gotten yourself into
trouble like this, what do you expect to gain by corning to me now?" No-Toes
said, "I just didn't understand my duty and was too careless of my body, and
so I lost a foot. But I've come now because I still have something that is
worth more than a foot and I want to try to hold on to it. There is nothing
that heaven doesn't cover, nothing that earth doesn't bear up. I supposed,
Master, that you would be like heaven and earth. How did I know you would act
like this?" "It was stupid of me," said Confucius. "Please, sir, won't you
come in? I'd like to describe to you what I have learned." But No-Toes went
out. Confudus said, "Be diligent, my disciples! Here is No-Toes, a man who
has had his foot cut off, and still he's striving to Following the suggestion
of Wang Mao-hung, J reverie the position of nri and wai. learn so he can make
up for the evil of his former condul't. How much more, then, should men whose
virtue is still unim­ paired!" No-Toes told the story to Lao Tan. "Confucius
certainly hasn't reached the stage of a Perfect Man, has he? What does he
mean coming around so obsequiously to study with you? 5 He is after the sham
illusion of fame and reputation and doesn't know that the Perfect Man looks
on these as so many handcuffs and fetters!" Lao Tan said, "Why don't you just
make him see that life and death are the same story, that acceptable and
unacceptable are on a single string? Wouldn't it be well to free him from his
handcuffs and fetters?" No-Toes said, "When Heaven has punished him, how can
you set him free?"

	Duke Ai of Lu said to Confucius, "In Wei there was an ugly man named Ai
T'ai-t'o. But when men were around him, they thought only of him and couldn't
break away, and when women saw him, they ran begging to their fathers and
mothers, saying, 'I'd rather be this gentleman's concubine than another man's
wife!'-there were more than ten such cases and it hasn't stopped yet. No one
ever heard him take the lead-he always just chimed in with other people. He
wasn't in the pasition of a ruler where he could save men's lives, and he had
no store of provisions to fill men's bellies. On top of that, he was ugly
enough to astound the whole world, chimed in but never led, and knew no more
than what went on right around him. And yet men and women Hocked to him. He
certainly must be different from other men, I thought, and I The meaning is
doubtful. I follow Kuo Hsiang in taking it to be a reference to !he legend
that Confucius went to Lao Tzu for instruction. summoned him so I could have
a look. Just as they said-he was ugly enough to astound the world. But he
hadn't been with me more than a month or so when I began to realize what kind
of man he was, and before the year was out, I really trusted him. There was
no one in the state to act as chief minister, and I wanted to hand the
government over to him. He was vague about giving an answer, evasive, as
though he hoped to be let off, and I was embarrassed, but in the end I turned
the state over to him. Then, before I knew it, he left me and went away. I
felt completely crushed, as though I'd suffered a loss and didn't have anyone
left to enjoy my state with. What kind of man is he anyway?" Confucius said,
"I once went on a mission to Ch'u, and as I was going along, I saw some
little pigs nursing at the body of their dead mother. After a while, they
gave a start and all ran away and left her, because they could no longer see
their likeness in her, she was not the same. In loving their mother, they
loved not her body but the thing that moved her body. When a man has been
killed in battle and people come to bury him, he has no use for his medals.
When a man has had his feet amputated, he doesn't care much about shoes. For
both, the thing that is basic no longer exists. When women are selected to be
consorts of the Son of Heaven, their nails are not pared and their ears are
not pierced. When a man has just taken a wife, he is kept in posts outside
[the palace] and is no longer sent on [dangerous] missions.8 If so much care
is taken to keep the body whole, how much more in the case of a man whose
virtue is whole? Now Ai T'ai-t'o says nothing and is trusted, accomplishes
nothing and is loved, so that people The sentence is unclear. Another
interpretation would be: "he is .11- lowed to spend nights at home and is not
required to sleep in the officials' dormitory.'' want to turn over their
states to him and are only afraid he won't accept. It must be that his powers
are whole, though his virtue takes no form." 'What do you mean when you say
his powers are whole?" asked Duke Ai. Confucius said, "Life, death,
preservation, loss, failure, success, poverty, riches, worthiness,
unworthiness, slander, fame, hunger, thirst, cold, heat-these are the
alternations of the world, the workings of fate. Day and night they change
place before us and wisdom cannot spy out their source. There­ fore, they
should not be enough to destroy your harmony; they should not be allowed to
enter the storehouse of spirit. If you can harmonize and delight in them,
master them and never be at a loss for joy, if you can do this day and night
without break and make it be spring with everything, mingling with all and
creating the moment within your own mind-this is what I call being whole in
power." "What do you mean when you say his virtue takes no form?" "Among
level things, water at rest is the most perfect, and therefore it can serve
as a standard. It guards what is inside and shows no movement outside. Virtue
is the establishment of perfect harmony. Though virtue takes no form, things
cannot break away from it." Some days later, Duke Ai reported his
conversation to Min Tzu.7 "At first, when I faced south and became ruler of
the realm, I tried to look after the regulation of the people and worried
that they might die. I really thought I understood things perfectly. But now
that I've heard the words of a Perfect Man, I'm afraid there was nothing to
my understand­ ing-I was thinking too little of my own welfare and ruining 

*A disciple of Confucius. 

the state. Confucius and I are not subject andruler-we are friends in virtue, that's all."

	Mr. Lame-Hunchback-No-Lips talked to Duke Ling of Wei, and Duke Ling was
so pleased with him that when he looked at normal men he thought their necks
looked too lean and skinny.8 Mr. Pitcher-Sized-\Ven talked to Duke Huan of
Ch'i, and Duke Huan was so pleased with him that when he looked at normal men
he thought their necks looked too lean and skinny. Therefore, if virtue is
preeminent, the body will be forgotten. But when men do not forget what can
be forgotten, but forget what cannot be forgotten-that may be called true
forgetting. So the sage has his wanderings. For him, knowledge is an
offshoot, promises are glue, favors are a patching up, and skill is a
peddler. The sage hatches no schemes, so what use has he for knowledge? He
does no carving, so what use has he for glue? He suffers no loss, so what use
has he for favors? He hawks no goods, so what use has he for peddling? These
four are called Heavenly Gruel. Heavenly Gruel is the food of Heaven, and if
he's already gotten food from Heaven, what use does he have for men? He has
the form of a man but not the feelings of a man. Since he has the form of a
man, he bands together with other men. Since he doesn't have the feelings of
a man, right and wrong cannot get at him. Puny and small, he sticks with the
rest of men. Massive and great, he perfects his Heaven alone. 

*8 Originally the text probably had some other phrase at this point referring to the walk,
back, or lips of normal men, which dropped out and was re­ placed by the
phrase from the parallel sentence that follows. 

Hui Tzu said to Chuang T zu,
"Can a man really be without feelings?" Chuang Tzu: "Yes." Hui T zu: "But a
man who has no feelings-how can you call him a man?" Chuang Tzu: "The Way
gave him a face; Heaven gave him a form-why can't you call him a man?" Hui
Tzu: "But if you've already called him a man, how can he be without
feelings?" Chuang Tzu: "That's not what I mean by feelings. When I talk about
having no feelings, I mean that a man doesn't allow likes or dislikes to get
in and do him harm. He just lets things be the way they are and doesn't try
to help life along." Hui Tzu: "If he doesn't try to help life along, then how
can he keep himself alive?" Chuang Tzu: 'The Way gave him a face; Heaven
gave' him a form. He doesn't let likes or dislikes get in and do him harm.
You, now-you treat your spirit like an outside. You wear out your energy,
leaning on a tree and moaning, slump­ ping at your desk and dozing-Heaven
picked out a body for you and you use it to gibber about 'hard' and
'white'!"
* 9 On "hard" and "white,'' see above, p. 37, n. 9. Chuang Tm's
c!escrip­ tion of Hui Tzu is rhymed in the original.
